Boston Common OCTOBER 12, 1713, 10:33:52A.M. ENOCH ROUNDS THE CORNER JUST as the executioner raises the noose above the woman's head. The crowd on the Common stop praying and sobbing for just as long as Jack Ketch stands there, elbows locked, for all the world like a carpenter heaving a ridge-beam into place. The rope clutches a disk of blue New England sky. The Puritans gaze at it and, to all appearances, think. Enoch the Red reins in his borrowed horse as it nears the edge of the crowd, and sees that the executioner's purpose is not to let them inspect his knotwork, but to give them all a narrow – and, to a Puritan, tantalizing – glimpse of the portal through which they all must pass one day. Boston's a dollop of hills in a spoon of marshes. The road up the spoon-handle is barred by a wall, with the usual gallows outside it, and victims, or parts of them, strung up or nailed to the city gates. Enoch has just come that way, and reckoned he had seen the last of such things – that thenceforth it would all be churches and taverns. But the dead men outside the gate were common robbers, killed for earthly crimes. What is happening now on the Common is of a more Sacramental nature. The noose lies on the woman's gray head like a crown. The executioner pushes it down. Her head forces it open like an infant's dilating the birth canal. When it finds the widest part it drops suddenly onto her shoulders. Her knees pimple the front of her apron and her skirts telescope into the platform as she makes to collapse. The executioner hugs her with one arm, like a dancing-master, to keep her upright, and adjusts the knot while an official reads the death warrant. This is as bland as a lease. The crowd scratches and shuffles. There are none of the diversions of a London hanging: no catcalls, jugglers, or pickpockets. Down at the other end of the Common, a squadron of lobsterbacks drills and marches round the base of a hummock with a stone powder-house planted in its top. An Irish sergeant bellows – bored but indignant – in a voice that carries forever on the wind, like the smell of smoke. He's not come to watch witch-hangings, but now that Enoch's blundered into one it would be bad form to leave. There is a drum-roll, and then a sudden awkward silence. He judges it very far from the worst hanging he's ever seen – no kicking or writhing, no breaking of ropes or unraveling of knots – all in all, an unusually competent piece of work. He hadn't really known what to expect of America. But people here seem to do things – hangings included – with a blunt, blank efficiency that's admirable and disappointing at the same time. Like jumping fish, they go about difficult matters with bloodless ease. As if they were all born knowing things that other people must absorb, along with færy-tales and superstitions, from their families and villages. Maybe it is because most of them came over on ships. As they are cutting the limp witch down, a gust tumbles over the Common from the North. On Sir Isaac Newton's temperature scale, where freezing is zero and the heat of the human body is twelve, it is probably four or five. If Herr Fahrenheit were here with one of his new quicksilver-filled, sealed-tube thermometers, he would probably observe something in the fifties. But this sort of wind, coming as it does from the North in the autumn, is more chilling than any mere instrument can tell. It reminds everyone here that if they don't want to be dead in a few months' time, they have firewood to stack and chinks to caulk. The wind is noticed by a hoarse preacher at the base of the gallows, who takes it to be Satan himself, come to carry the witch's soul to hell, and who is not slow to share this opinion with his flock. The preacher is staring Enoch in the eye as he testifies. Enoch feels the heightened, chafing self-consciousness that is the precursor to fear. What's to prevent them from trying and hanging him as a witch? How must he look to these people? A man of indefinable age but evidently broad experience, with silver hair queued down to the small of his back, a copper-red beard, pale gray eyes, and skin weathered and marred like a blacksmith's ox-hide apron. Dressed in a long traveling-cloak, a walking-staff and an outmoded rapier strapped ‘longside the saddle of a notably fine black horse. Two pistols in his waistband, prominent enough that Indians, highwaymen, and French raiders can clearly see them from ambuscades (he'd like to move them out of view, but reaching for them at this moment seems like a bad idea). Saddlebags (should they be searched) filled with instruments, flasks of quicksilver, and stranger matters – some, as they'd learn, quite dangerous – books in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin pocked with the occult symbols of Alchemists and Kabalists. Things could go badly for him in Boston. But the crowd takes the preacher's ranting not as a call to arms but a signal to turn and disperse, muttering. The redcoats discharge their muskets with deep hissing booms, like handfuls of sand hurled against a kettledrum. Enoch dismounts into the midst of the colonists. He sweeps the robe round him, concealing the pistols, pulls the hood back from his head, and amounts to just another weary pilgrim. He does not meet any man's eye but scans their faces sidelong, and is surprised by a general lack of self-righteousness. 'God willing,' one man says, 'that'll be the last one.' 'Do you mean, sir, the last witch?' Enoch asks. 'I mean, sir, the last hanging.' Flowing like water round the bases of the steep hills, they migrate across a burying ground on the south edge of the Common, already full of lost Englishmen, and follow the witch's corpse down the street. The houses are mostly of wood, and so are the churches. Spaniards would have built a single great cathedral here, of stone, with gold on the inside, but the colonists cannot agree on anything and so it is more like Amsterdam: small churches on every block, some barely distinguishable from barns, each no doubt preaching that all of the others have it wrong. But at least they can muster a consensus to kill a witch. She is borne off into a new burying ground, which for some reason they have situated hard by the granary. Enoch is at a loss to know whether this juxtaposition – that is, storing their Dead, and their Staff of Life, in the same place – is some sort of Message from the city's elders, or simple bad taste. Enoch, who has seen more than one city burn, recognizes the scars of a great fire along this main street. Houses and churches are being rebuilt with brick or stone. He comes to what must be the greatest intersection in the town, where this road from the city gate crosses a very broad street that runs straight down to salt water, and continues on a long wharf that projects far out into the harbor, thrusting across a ruined rampart of stones and logs: the rubble of a disused sea-wall. The long wharf is ridged with barracks. It reaches far enough out into the harbor that one of the Navy's very largest men-of-war is able to moor at its end. Turning his head the other way, he sees artillery mounted up on a hillside, and blue-coated gunners tending to a vatlike mortar, ready to lob iron bombs onto the decks of any French or Spanish galleons that might trespass on the bay. So, drawing a mental line from the dead criminals at the city gate, to the powder-house on the Common, to the witch-gallows, and finally to the harbor defenses, he has got one Cartesian number-line – what Leibniz would call the Ordinate – plotted out: he understands what people are afraid of in Boston, and how the churchmen and the generals keep the place in hand. But it remains to be seen what can be plotted in the space above and below. The hills of Boston are skirted by endless flat marshes that fade, slow as twilight, into Harbor or River, providing blank empty planes on which men with ropes and rulers can construct whatever strange curves they phant'sy. Enoch knows where to find the Origin of this coordinate system, because he has talked to ship's masters who have visited Boston. He goes down to where the long wharf grips the shore. Among fine stone sea-merchants' houses, there is a brick-red door with a bunch of grapes dangling above it. Enoch goes through that door and finds himself in a good tavern. Men with swords and expensive clothes turn round to look at him. Slavers, merchants of rum and molasses and tea and tobacco, and captains of the ships that carry those things. It could be any place in the world, for the same tavern is in London, Cadiz, Smyrna, and Manila, and the same men are in it. None of them cares, supposing they even know, that witches are being hanged five minutes' walk away. He is much more comfortable in here than out there; but he has not come to be comfortable. The particular sea-captain he's looking for – van Hoek – is not here. He backs out before the tavern-keeper can tempt him. Back in America and among Puritans, he enters into narrower streets and heads north, leading his horse over a rickety wooden bridge thrown over a little mill-creek. Flotillas of shavings from some carpenter's block-plane sail down the stream like ships going off to war. Underneath them the weak current nudges turds and bits of slaughtered animals down towards the harbor. It smells accordingly. No denying there is a tallow-chandlery not far upwind, where beast-grease not fit for eating is made into candles and soap. 'Did you come from Europe?' He had sensed someone was following him, but seen nothing whenever he looked back. Now he knows why: his doppelgänger is a lad, moving about like a drop of quicksilver that cannot be trapped under the thumb. Ten years old, Enoch guesses. Then the boy thinks about smiling and his lips part. His gums support a rubble of adult teeth shouldering their way into pink gaps, and deciduous ones flapping like tavern signs on skin hinges. He's closer to eight. But cod and corn have made him big for his age – at least by London standards. And he is precocious in every respect save social graces. Enoch might answer, Yes, I am from Europe, where a boy addresses an old man as 'sir,' if he addresses him at all.But he cannot get past the odd nomenclature. 'Europe,' he repeats, 'is that what you name it here? Most people there say Christendom .' 'But we have Christians here .' 'So this is Christendom, you are saying,' says Enoch, 'but, obviously to you, I've come from somewhere else.Perhaps Europe is the better term, now that you mention it. Hmm.' 'What do other people call it?' 'Do I look like a schoolmaster to you?' 'No, but you talk like one.' 'You know something of schoolmasters, do you?' 'Yes, sir,' the boy says, faltering a bit as he sees the jaws of the trap swinging toward his leg. 'Yet here it is the middle of Monday – ' 'The place was empty 'cause of the Hanging. I didn't want to stay and – ' 'And what?' 'Get more ahead of the others than I was already.' 'If you are ahead, the correct thing is to get used to it:not to make yourself into an imbecile. Come, you belong in school.' 'School is where one learns,' says the boy. 'If you'd be so kind as to answer my question, sir, then I should be learning something, which would mean I were in school.' The boy is obviously dangerous. So Enoch decides to accept the proposition. 'You may address me as Mr. Root. And you are – ?' 'Ben. Son of Josiah. The tallow-chandler. Why do you laugh, Mr. Root?' 'Because in most parts of Christendom – or Europe – tallow-chandlers' sons do not go to grammar school. It is a peculiarity of . . . your people.' Enoch almost let slip the word Puritans.Back in England, where Puritans are a memory of a bygone age, or at worst streetcorner nuisances, the term serves well enough to lampoon the backwoodsmen of Massachusetts Bay Colony. But as he keeps being reminded here, the truth of the matter is more complex. From a coffeehouse in London, one may speak blithely of Islam and the Mussulman, but in Cairo such terms are void. Here Enoch is in the Puritans' Cairo. 'I shall answer your question,' Enoch says before Ben can let fly with any more. 'What do people in other parts call the place I am from? Well, Islam – a larger, richer, and in most ways more sophisticated civilization that hems in the Christians of Europe to the east and the south – divides all the world into only three parts: their part, which is the dar al-Islam ; the part with which they are friendly, which is the dar as-sulh, or House of Peace; and everything else, which is the dar al-harb , or House of War. The latter is, I'm sorry to say, a far more apt name than Christendom for the part of the world where most of the Christians live.' 'I know of the war,' Ben says coolly. 'It is at an end. A Peace has been signed at Utrecht. France gets Spain. Austria gets the Spanish Netherlands. We get Gibraltar, Newfoundland, St. Kitts, and – ' lowering his voice “ – the slave trade.' 'Yes – the Asiento. ' 'Ssh! There are a few here, sir, opposed to it, and they are dangerous.' 'You have Barkers here?' 'Yes, sir.' Enoch studies the boy's face now with some care, for the chap he is looking for is a sort of Barker, and it would be useful to know how such are regarded hereabouts by their less maniacal brethren. Ben seems cautious, rather than contemptuous. 'But you are speaking only of one war – ' 'The War of the Spanish Succession,' says Ben, 'whose cause was the death in Madrid of King Carlos the Sufferer.' 'I should say that wretched man's death was the pretext, not the cause,' says Enoch. 'The War of the Spanish Succession was only the second, and I pray the last, part of a great war that began a quarter of a century ago, at the time of – ' 'The Glorious Revolution!' 'As some style it. You have been at your lessons, Ben, and I commend you. Perhaps you know that in that Revolution the King of England – a Catholic – was sent packing, and replaced by a Protestant King and Queen.' 'William and Mary!' 'Indeed. But has it occurred to you to wonder why Protestants and Catholics were at war in the first place?' 'In our studies we more often speak of wars among Protestants.' 'Ah, yes – a phenomenon restricted to England. That is natural, for your parents came here because of such a conflict.' 'The Civil War,' says Ben. 'Your side won the Civil War,' Enoch reminds him, 'but later came the Restoration, which was a grievous defeat for your folk, and sent them flocking hither.' 'You have hit the mark, Mr. Root,' says Ben, 'for that is just why my father Josiah quit England.' 'What about your mother?' 'Nantucket-born sir. But her father came here to escape from a wicked Bishop – a loud fellow, or so I have heard – ' 'Finally, Ben, I have found a limit to your knowledge. You are speaking of Archbishop Laud – a terrible oppressor of Puritans – as some called your folk – under Charles the First. The Puritans paid him back by chopping off the head of that same Charles in Charing Cross, in the year of our lord sixteen hundred and forty-nine.' 'Cromwell,' says Ben. 'Cromwell. Yes. He had something to do with it. Now, Ben. We have been standing by this millstream for rather a long while. I grow cold. My horse is restless. We have, as I said, found the place where your erudition gives way to ignorance. I shall be pleased to hold up my end of our agreement – that is, to teach you things, so that when you go home to-night you may claim to Josiah that you were in school the whole day. Though the schoolmaster may give him an account that shall conflict with yours. However, I do require certain minor services in return.' 'Only name them, Mr. Root.' 'I have come to Boston to find a certain man who at last report was living here. He is an old man.' 'Older than you?' 'No, but he might seem older.' 'How old is he, then?' 'He watched the head of King Charles the First being chopped off.' 'At least threescore and four then.' 'Ah, I see you have been learning sums and differences.' 'And products and dividends, Mr. Root.' 'Work this into your reckonings, then: the one I seek had an excellent view of the beheading, for he was sitting upon his father's shoulders.' 'Couldn't have been more than a few years old then. Unless his father was a sturdy fellow indeed.' 'His father was sturdy in a sense,' says Enoch, 'for Archbishop Laud had caused his ears and his nose to be cut off in Star Chamber some two decades before, and yet he was not daunted, but kept up his agitation against the King. Against all Kings.' 'He was a Barker.' Again, this word brings no sign of contempt to Ben's face. Shocking how different this place is from London. 'But to answer your question, Ben: Drake was not an especially big or strong man.' 'So the son on his shoulders was small. By now he should be, perhaps, threescore and eight. But I do not know of a Mr. Drake here.' 'Drake was the father's Christian name.' 'Pray, what then is the name of the family?' 'I will not tell you that just now,' says Enoch. For the man he wants to find might have a very poor character among these people – might already have been hanged on Boston Common, for all Enoch knows. 'How can I help you find him, sir, if you won't let me know his name?' 'By guiding me to the Charlestown ferry,' Enoch says, 'for I know that he spends his days on the north side of the River Charles.' 'Follow me,' says Ben, 'but I hope you've silver.' 'Oh yes, I've silver,' says Enoch. THEY ARE SKIRTING A KNOB of land at the north end of the city. Wharves, smaller and older than the big one, radiate from its shore. The sails and rigging, spars and masts to his starboard combine into a tangle vast and inextricable, as characters on a page must do in the eyes of an unlettered peasant. Enoch does not see van Hoek or Minerva. He begins to fear that he shall have to go into taverns and make inquiries, and spend time, and draw attention. Ben takes him direct to the wharf where the Charlestown Ferry is ready to shove off. It is all crowded with hanging-watchers, and Enoch must pay the waterman extra to bring the horse aboard. Enoch pulls his purse open and peers into it. The King of Spain's coat of arms stares back at him, stamped in silver, variously blurred, chopped, and mangled. The Christian name varies, depending on which king reigned when each of these coins was hammered out in New Spain, but after that they all sayd. g. hispan et ind rex .By the grace of God, of Spain and the Indies, King. The same sort of bluster that all kings stamp onto their coins. Those words don't matter to anyone – most people can't read them anyway. What does matter is that a man standing in a cold breeze on the Boston waterfront, seeking to buy passage on a ferry run by an Englishman, cannot pay with the coins that are being stamped out by Sir Isaac Newton in the Royal Mint at the Tower of London. The only coinage here is Spanish – the same coins that are changing hands, at this moment, in Lima, Manila, Macao, Goa, Bandar Abbas, Mocha, Cairo, Smyrna, Malta, Madrid, the Canary Islands, Marseilles. The man who saw Enoch down to the docks in London months ago said: 'Gold knows things that no man does.' Enoch churns his purse up and down, making the coins-fragments fly, hoping to spy a single pie-slice – one-eighth of a Piece of Eight, or a bit, as they are called. But he already knows he's spent most of his bits for small necessaries along the road. The smallest piece he has in his purse right now is half of a coin – four bits. He looks up the street and sees a blacksmith's forge only a stone's throw away. Some quick work with a hammer and that smith could make change for him. The ferryman's reading Enoch's mind. He couldn't see into the purse, but he could hear the massive gonging of whole coins colliding, without the clashing tinkle of bits. 'We're shoving off,' he is pleased to say. Enoch comes to his senses, remembers what he's doing, and hands over a silver semicircle. 'But the boy comes with me,' he insists, 'and you'll give him passage back.' 'Done,' says the ferryman. This is more than Ben could have hoped for, and yet he was hoping for it. Though the boy is too self-possessed to say as much, this voyage is to him as good as a passage down to the Caribbean to go a-pirating on the Spanish Main. He goes from wharf to ferry without touching the gangplank. Charlestown is less than a mile distant, across the mouth of a sluggish river. It is a low green hill shingled with long slender hay-mows limned by dry-stone fences. On the slope facing toward Boston, below the summit but above the endless tidal flats and cattail-filled marshes, a town has occurred: partly laid out by geometers, but partly growing like ivy. The ferryman's hefty Africans pace short reciprocating arcs on the deck, sweeping and shoveling the black water of the Charles Basin with long stanchion-mounted oars, minting systems of vortices that fall to aft, flailing about one another, tracing out fading and flattening conic sections that Sir Isaac could probably work out in his head. The Hypothesis of Vortices is pressed with many difficulties. The sky's a matted reticule of taut jute and spokeshaved tree-trunks. Gusts make the anchored ships start and jostle like nervous horses hearing distant guns. Irregular waves slap curiously at the lapping clinkers of their hulls, which are infested with barefoot jacks paying pitch and oakum into troublesome seams. The ships appear to glide this way and that as the ferry's movement plays with the parallax. Enoch, who has the good fortune to be a bit taller than most of the other passengers, hands the reins to Ben and excuses his way around the ferry's deck trying to read the names. He knows the ship he's looking for, though, simply by recognizing the carved Lady mounted below the bowsprit: a gray-eyed woman in a gilded helmet, braving the North Atlantic seas with a snaky shield and nipples understandably erect. Minerva hasn't weighed anchor yet – that's lucky – but she is heavy-laden and gives every appearance of being just about to put to sea. Men are walking aboard hugging baskets of loaves so fresh they're steaming. Enoch turns back toward the shore to read the level of the tide from a barnacled pile, then turns the other way to check the phase and altitude of the moon. Tide will be going out soon, and Minerva will probably want to ride it. Enoch finally spies van Hoek standing on the foredeck, doing some paperwork on the top of a barrel, and through some kind of action-at-a-distance wills him to look up and notice him, down on the ferry. Van Hoek looks his way and stiffens. Enoch makes no outward sign, but stares him in the eye long enough to give him second thoughts about pushing for a hasty departure. A colonist in a black hat is attempting to make friends with one of the Africans, who doesn't speak much English – but this is no hindrance, the white man has taught himself a few words of some African tongue. The slave is very dark, and the arms of the King of Spain are branded into his left shoulder, and so he is probably Angolan. Life has been strange to him: abducted by Africans fiercer than he, chained up in a hole in Luanda, marked with a hot iron to indicate that duty had been paid on him, loaded onto a ship, and sent to a cold place full of pale men. After all of that, you'd think that nothing could possibly surprise him. But he's astonished by whatever this Barker is telling him. The Barker's punching at the air and becoming quite exercised, and not just because he is inarticulate. Assuming that he has been in touch with his brethren in London (and that is a very good assumption), he is probably telling the Angolan that he, and all of the other slaves, are perfectly justified in taking up arms and mounting a violent rebellion. 'Your mount is very fine. Did you bring him from Europe?' 'No, Ben. Borrowed him in New Amsterdam. New York, I mean.' 'Why'd you sail to New York if the man you seek's in Boston?' 'The next America-bound ship from the Pool of London happened to be headed thither.' 'You're in a terrible hurry, then!' 'I shall be in a terrible hurry to toss you over the side if you continue to draw such inferences.' This quiets Ben, but only long enough for him to circle round and probe Enoch's defenses from another quarter: 'The owner of this horse must be a very dear friend of yours, to lend you such a mount.' Enoch must now be a bit careful. The owner's a gentleman of quality in New York. If Enoch claims his friendship, then proceeds to make a bloody hash of things in Boston, it could deal damage to the gentleman's repute. 'It is not so much that he is a friend. I'd never met him until I showed up at his door a few days ago.' Ben can't fathom it. 'Then why'd he even admit you to his house? By your leave, sir, looking as you do, and armed. Why'd he lend you such a worthy stallion?' 'He let me in to his house because there was a riot underway, and I requested sanctuary.' Enoch gazes over at the Barker, then sidles closer to Ben. 'Here is a wonder for you: When my ship reached New York, we were greeted by the spectacle of thousands of slaves – some Irish, the rest Angolan – running through the streets with pitchforks and firebrands. Lobsterbacks tromping after them in leapfrogging blocks, firing volleys. The white smoke of their muskets rose and mingled with the black smoke of burning warehouses to turn the sky into a blazing, spark-shot melting-pot, wondrous to look at but, as we supposed, unfit to support life. Our pilot had us stand a-loof until the tide forced his hand. We put in at a pier that seemed to be under the sway of the redcoats. 'Anyway,' Enoch continues – for his discourse is beginning to draw unwanted notice – “that's how I got in the door. He lent me the horse because he and I are Fellows in the same Society, and I am here, in a way, to do an errand for that Society.' 'Is it a Society of Barkers, like?' asks Ben, stepping in close to whisper, and glancing at the one who's proselytizing the slave. For by now Ben has taken note of Enoch's various pistols and blades, and matched him with tales his folk have probably told him concerning that fell Sect during their halcyon days of Cathedral-sacking and King-killing. 'No, it is a society of philosophers,' Enoch says, before the boy's phant'sies wax any wilder. 'Philosophers, sir!' Enoch had supposed the boy should be disappointed. Instead he's thrilled. So Enoch was correct: the boy's dangerous. ' NaturalPhilosophers. Not, mind you, the other sort – ' 'Unnatural?' 'An apt coinage. Some would say it's the unnatural philosophers that are to blame for Protestants fighting Protestants in England and Catholics everywhere else.' 'What, then, is a Natural Philosopher?' 'One who tries to prevent his ruminations from straying, by hewing to what can be observed, and proving things, when possible, by rules of logic.' This gets him nowhere with Ben. 'Rather like a Judge in a Court, who insists on facts, and scorns rumor, hearsay, and appeals to sentiment. As when your own Judges finally went up to Salem and pointed out that the people there were going crazy.' Ben nods. Good. 'What is the name of your Clubb?' 'The Royal Society of London.' 'One day I shall be a Fellow of it, and a Judge of such things.' 'I shall nominate you the moment I get back, Ben.' 'Is it a part of your code that members must lend each other horses in time of need?' 'No, but it is a rule that they must pay dues – for which there is ever a need – and this chap had not paid his dues in many a year. Sir Isaac – who is the President of the Royal Society – looks with disfavor on such. I explained to the gentleman in New York why it was a Bad Idea to land on Sir Isaac's Shit List – by your leave, by your leave – and he was so convinced by my arguments that he lent me his best riding-horse without further suasion.' 'He's a beauty,' Ben says, and strokes the animal's nose. The stallion mistrusted Ben at first for being small, darting, and smelling of long-dead beasts. Now he has accepted the boy as an animated hitching-post, capable of performing a few services such as nose-scratching and fly-shooing. The ferryman is more amused than angry when he discovers a Barker conspiring with his slave, and shoos him away. The Barker identifies Enoch as fresh meat, and begins trying to catch his eye. Enoch moves away from him and pretends to study the approaching shore. The ferry is maneuvering around a raft of immense logs drifting out of the estuary, each marked with the King's Arrow – going to build ships for the Navy. Inland of Charlestown spreads a loose agglomeration of hamlets conjoined by a network of cowpaths. The largest cowpath goes all the way to Newtowne, where Harvard College is. But most of it just looks like a forest, smoking without being burned, spattered with muffled whacks of axes and hammers. Occasional musket shots boom in the distance and are echoed from hamlet to hamlet – some kind of system for relaying information across the countryside. Enoch wonders how he's ever going to find Daniel in all that. He moves toward a talkative group that has formed on the center of the ferry's deck, allowing the less erudite (for these must be Harvard men) to break the wind for them. It is a mix of pompous sots and peering quick-faced men basting their sentences together with bad Latin. Some of them have a dour Puritan look about them, others are dressed in something closer to last year's London mode. A pear-shaped, red-nosed man in a tall gray wig seems to be the Don of this jury-rigged College. Enoch catches this one's eye and lets him see that he's bearing a sword. This is not a threat, but an assertion of status. 'A gentleman traveler from abroad joins us. Welcome, sir, to our humble Colony!' Enoch goes through the requisite polite movements and utterances. They show a great deal of interest in him, a sure sign that not much new and interesting is going on at Harvard College. But the place is only some three-quarters of a century old, so how much can really be happening there? They want to know if he's from a Germanic land; he says not really. They guess that he has come on some Alchemical errand, which is an excellent guess, but wrong. When it is polite to do so, he tells them the name of the man he has come to see. He's never heard such scoffing. They are, to a man, pained that a gentleman should've crossed the North Atlantic, and now the Charles Basin, only to spoil the journey by meeting with that fellow. 'I know him not,' Enoch lies. 'Then let us prepare you, sir!' one of them says. 'Daniel Waterhouse is a man advanced in years, but the years have been less kind to him than you.' 'He is correctly addressed as Dr. Waterhouse, is he not?' Silence ruined by stifled gurgles. 'I do not presume to correct any man,' Enoch says, 'only to be sure that I give no offense when I encounter the fellow in person.' 'Indeed, he is accounted a Doctor,' says the pear-shaped Don, 'but – ' 'Of what?' someone asks. 'Gears,' someone suggests, to great hilarity. 'Nay, nay!' says the Don, shouting them down, in a show of false goodwill. 'For all of his gears are to no purpose without a primum mobile, a source of motive power – ' 'The Franklin boy!' and all turn to look at Ben. 'Today it might be young Ben, tomorrow perhaps little Godfrey Waterhouse will step into Ben's shoes. Later perhaps a rodent on a tread-mill. But in any case, the vis viva is conducted into Dr. Waterhouse's gear-boxes by – what? Anyone?' The Don cups a hand to an ear Socratically. 'Shafts?' someone guesses. 'Cranks!' another shouts. 'Ah, excellent! Our colleague Waterhouse is, then, a Doctor of – what?' 'Cranks!' says the entire College in unison. 'And so devoted is our Doctor of Cranks to his work that he quite sacrifices himself,' says the Don admiringly. 'Going many days uncovered – ' 'Shaking the gear-filings from his sleeves when he sits down to break bread – ' 'Better than pepper – ' 'And cheafer!' 'Are you, perhaps, coming to join his Institute, then?' 'Or foreclose on't?' Too hilarious. 'I have heard of his Institute, but know little of it,' Enoch Root says. He looks over at Ben, who has gone red in the neck and ears, and turned his back on all to nuzzle the horse. 'Many learned scholars are in the same state of ignorance – be not ashamed.' 'Since he came to America, Dr. Waterhouse has been infected with the local influenza, whose chief symptom is causing men to found new projects and endeavours, rather than going to the trouble of remedying the old ones.' 'He's not entirely satisfied with Harvard College then!?' Enoch says wonderingly. 'Oh, no! He has founded – ' “ – and personally endowed:' “ – and laid the cornerstone – ' “ – corner-log, if truth be told – ' “ – of – what does he call it?' 'The Massachusetts Bay Colony Institute of Technologickal Arts.' 'Where might I find Dr. Waterhouse's Institute?' Enoch inquires. 'Midway from Charlestown to Harvard. Follow the sound of grinding gears ‘til you come to America's smallest and smokiest dwelling – ' 'Sir, you are a learned and clear-minded gentleman,' says the Don. 'If your errand has aught to do with Philosophy, then is not Harvard College a more fitting destination?' 'Mr. Root is a Natural Philosopher of note, sir!' blurts Ben, only as a way to prevent himself bursting into tears. The way he says it makes it clear he thinks the Harvard men are of the Unnatural type. 'He is a Fellow of the Royal Society!' Oh, dear. The Don steps forward and hunches his shoulders like a conspirator. 'I beg your pardon, sir, I did not know.' 'It is quite all right, really.' 'Dr. Waterhouse, you must be warned, has fallen quite under the spell of Herr Leibniz – ' “ – him that stole the calculus from Sir Isaac – ' someone footnotes. “ – yes, and, like Leibniz, is infected with Metaphysickal thinking – ' “ – a throwback to the Scholastics, sir – notwithstanding Sir Isaac's having exploded the old ways through very clear demonstrations – ' “ – and labors now, like a possessed man, on a Mill – designed after Leibniz's principles – that he imagines will discover new truths through computation !' 'Perhaps our visitor has come to exorcise him of Leibniz's daemons!' some very drunk fellow hypothesizes. Enoch clears his throat irritably, hacking loose a small accumulation of yellow bile – the humour of anger and ill-temper. He says, 'It does Dr. Leibniz an injustice to call him a mere metaphysician.' This challenge produces momentary silence, followed by tremendous excitement and gaiety. The Don smiles thinly and squares off. 'I know of a small tavern on Harvard Square, a suitable venue in which I could disabuse the gentleman of any misconceptions – ' The offer to sit down in front of a crock of beer and edify these wags is dangerously tempting. But the Charlestown waterfront is drawing near, the slaves already shortening their strokes; Minerva is fairly straining at her hawsers in eagerness to catch the tide, and he must have results. He'd rather get this done discreetly. But that is hopeless now that Ben has unmasked him. More important is to get it done quickly. Besides, Enoch has lost his temper. He draws a folded and sealed Letter from his breast pocket and, for lack of a better term, brandishes it. The Letter is borrowed, scrutinized – one side is inscribed 'Doktor Waterhouse – Newtowne – Massachusetts' – and flipped over. Monocles are quarried from velvet-lined pockets for the Examination of the Seal: a lump of red wax the size of Ben's fist. Lips move and strange mutterings occur as parched throats attempt German. All of the Professors seem to realize it at once. They jump back as if the letter were a specimen of white phosphorus that had suddenly burst into flame. The Don is left holding it. He extends it towards Enoch the Red with a certain desperate pleading look. Enoch punishes him by being slow to accept the burden. “Bitte, mein herr . . .' 'English is perfectly sufficient,' Enoch says. 'Preferable, in fact.' At the fringes of the robed and hooded mob, certain nearsighted faculty members are frantic with indignation over not having been able to read the seal. Their colleagues are muttering to them words like 'Hanover' and 'Ansbach.' A man removes his hat and bows to Enoch. Then another. They have not even set foot in Charlestown before the dons have begun to make a commotion. Porters and would-be passengers stare quizzically at the approaching ferry as they are assailed with shouts of 'Make way!' and broad waving motions. The ferry's become a floating stage packed with bad actors. Enoch wonders whether any of these men really supposes that word of their diligence will actually make its way back to court in Hanover, and be heard by their future Queen. It is ghoulish – they are behaving as if Queen Anne were already dead and buried, and the Hanovers on the throne. 'Sir, if you'd only told me 'twas Daniel Waterhouse you sought, I'd have taken you to him without delay – and without all of this bother. ' 'I erred by not confiding in you, Ben,' Enoch says. Indeed. In retrospect, it's obvious that in such a small town, Daniel would have noticed a lad like Ben, or Ben would have been drawn to Daniel, or both. 'Do you know the way?' 'Of course!' 'Mount up,' Enoch commands, and nods at the horse. Ben needn't be asked twice. He's up like a spider. Enoch follows as soon as dignity and inertia will allow. They share the saddle, Ben on Enoch's lap with his legs thrust back and wedged between Enoch's knees and the horse's rib-cage. The horse has, overall, taken a dim view of the Ferry and the Faculty, and bangs across the plank as soon as it has been thrown down. They're pursued through the streets of Charlestown by some of the more nimble Doctors. But Charlestown doesn't have that many streets and so the chase is brief. Then they break out into the mephitic bog on its western flank. It puts Enoch strongly in mind of another swampy, dirty, miasma-ridden burg full of savants: Cambridge, England. 'INTO YONDER COPPICE , then ford the creek,' Ben suggests. 'We shall lose the Professors, and perhaps find Godfrey. When we were on the ferry, I spied him going thither with a pail.' 'Is Godfrey the son of Dr. Waterhouse?' 'Indeed, sir. Two years younger than I.' 'Would his middle name, perchance, be William?' 'How'd you know that, Mr. Root?' 'He is very likely named after Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.' 'A friend of yours and Sir Isaac's?' 'Of mine, yes. Of Sir Isaac's, no – and therein lies a tale too long to tell now.' 'Would it fill a book?' 'In truth, ‘twould fill several:and it is not even finished yet.' 'When shall it be finished?' 'At times, I fear never. But you and I shall hurry it to its final act to-day, Ben. How much farther to the Massachusetts Bay Colony Institute of Technologickal Arts?' Ben shrugs. 'It is halfway between Charlestown and Harvard. But close to the river. More than a mile. Perhaps less than two.' The horse is disinclined to enter the coppice, so Ben tumbles off and goes in there afoot to flush out little Godfrey. Enoch finds a place to ford the creek that runs through it, and works his way round to the other side of the little wood to find Ben engaged in an apple-fight with a smaller, paler lad. Enoch dismounts and brokers a peace, then hurries the boys on by offering them a ride on the horse. Enoch walks ahead, leading it; but soon enough the horse divines that they are bound for a timber building in the distance. For it is the only building, and a faint path leads to it. Thenceforth Enoch need only walk alongside, and feed him the odd apple. 'The sight of you two lads scuffling over apples in this bleak gusty place full of Puritans puts me in mind of something remarkable I saw a long time ago.' 'Where?' asks Godfrey. 'Grantham, Lincolnshire. Which is part of England.' 'How long ago, to be exact?' Ben demands, taking the empiricist bit in his teeth. 'That is a harder question than it sounds, for the way I remember such things is most disorderly.' 'Why were you journeying to that bleak place?' asks Godfrey. 'To stop being pestered. In Grantham lived an apothecary, name of Clarke, an indefatigable pesterer.' 'Then why'd you go to him?' 'He'd been pestering me with letters, wanting me to deliver certain necessaries of his trade. He'd been doing it for years – ever since sending letters had become possible again.' 'What made it possible?' 'In my neck of the woods – for I was living in a town in Saxony, called Leipzig – the peace of Westphalia did.' '1648!' Ben says donnishly to the younger boy. 'The end of the Thirty Years' War.' 'At his end,' Enoch continues, 'it was the removal of the King's head from the rest of the King, which settled the Civil War and brought a kind of peace to England.' '1649,' Godfrey murmurs before Ben can get it out. Enoch wonders whether Daniel has been so indiscreet as to regale his son with decapitation yarns. 'If Mr. Clarke had been pestering you for years , then you must have gone to Grantham in the middle of the 1650s,' Ben says. 'How can you be that old?' Godfrey asks. 'Ask your father,' Enoch returns. 'I am still endeavouring to answer the question of when exactly. Ben is correct. I couldn't have been so rash as to make the attempt before, let us say, 1652; for, regicide notwithstanding, the Civil War did not really wind up for another couple of years. Cromwell smashed the Royalists for the umpteenth and final time at Worcester. Charles the Second ran off to Paris with as many of his noble supporters as had not been slain yet. Come to think of it, I saw him, and them, at Paris.' 'Why Paris ? That were a dreadful way to get from Leipzig to Lincolnshire!' says Ben. 'Your geography is stronger than your history. What do you phant'sy would be a good way to make that journey?' 'Through the Dutch Republic, of course.' 'And indeed I did stop there, to look in on a Mr. Huygens in the Hague. But I did not sail from any Dutch port.' 'Why not? The Dutch are ever so much better at sailing than the French!' 'But what was the first thing that Cromwell did after winning the Civil War?' 'Granted all men, even Jews, the right to worship wheresoever they pleased,' says Godfrey, as if reciting a catechism. 'Well, naturally – that was the whole point , wasn't it? But other than that – ?' 'Killed a great many Irishmen,' Ben tries. 'True, too true – but it's not the answer I was looking for. The answer is: the Navigation Act. And a sea-war against the Dutch. So you see, Ben, journeying via Paris might have been roundabout, but it was infinitely safer. Besides, people in Paris had been pestering me, too, and they had more money than Mr. Clarke. So Mr. Clarke had to get in line, as they say in New York.' 'Why were so many pestering you?' asks Godfrey. 'Rich Tories, no less!' adds Ben. 'We did not begin calling such people Tories until a good bit later,' Enoch corrects him. 'But your question is apt: what did I have in Leipzig that was wanted so badly, alike by an apothecary in Grantham and a lot of Cavalier courtiers sitting in Paris waiting for Cromwell to grow old and die of natural causes?' 'Something to do with the Royal Society?' guesses Ben. 'Shrewd try. Very close to the mark. But this was in the days before the Royal Society, indeed before Natural Philosophy as we know it. Oh, there were a few – Francis Bacon, Galileo, Descartes – who'd seen the light, and had done all that they could to get everyone else to attend to it. But in those days, most of the chaps who were curious about how the world worked were captivated by a rather different approach called Alchemy.' 'My daddy hates Alchemists!' Godfrey announces – very proud of his daddy. 'I believe I know why. But this is 1713. Rather a lot has changed. In the æra I am speaking of, it was Alchemy, or nothing. I knew a lot of Alchemists. I peddled them the stuff they needed. Some of those English cavaliers had dabbled in the Art. It was the gentlemanly thing to do. Even the King-in-Exile had a laboratory. After Cromwell had beaten them like kettledrums and sent them packing to France, they found themselves with nothing to pass the years except – ' and here, if he'd been telling the story to adults, Enoch would've listed a few of the ways they had spent their time. 'Except what, Mr. Root?' 'Studying the hidden laws of God's creation. Some of them – in particular John Comstock and Thomas More Anglesey – fell in with Monsieur LeFebure, who was the apothecary to the French Court. They spent rather a lot of time on Alchemy.' 'But wasn't it all stupid nonsense, rot, gibberish, and criminally fraudulent nincompoopery?' 'Godfrey, you are living proof that the apple does not fall far from the tree. Who am I to dispute such matters with your father? Yes. ‘Twas all rubbish.' 'Then why'd you go to Paris?' 'Partly, if truth be told, I wished to see the coronation of the French King.' 'Which one?' asks Godfrey. 'The same one as now!' says Ben, outraged that they are having to waste their time on such questions. 'The big one,' Enoch says, ' theKing. Louis the Fourteenth. His formal coronation was in 1654. They anointed him with angel-balm, a thousand years old.' 'Eeeyew, it must have stunk to high heaven!' 'Hard to say, in France.' 'Where would they've gotten such a thing?' 'Never mind. I am drawing closer to answering the question of when. But that was not my whole reason. Really it was that something was happening. Huygens – a brilliant youth, of a great family in the Hague – was at work on a pendulum-clock there that was astonishing. Of course, pendulums were an old idea – but he did something simple and beautiful that fixed them so that they would actually tell time! I saw a prototype, ticking away there in that magnificent house, where the afternoon light streamed in off the Plein – that's a sort of square hard by the palace of the Dutch Court. Then down to Paris, where Comstock and Anglesey were toiling away on – you're correct – stupid nonsense. They truly wanted to learn. But they wanted the brilliance of a Huygens, the audacity to invent a whole new discipline. Alchemy was the only way they knew of.' 'How'd you cross over to England if there was a sea-war on?' 'French salt-smugglers,' says Enoch, as if this were self-evident. 'Now, many an English gentleman had made up his mind that staying in London and dabbling with Alchemy was safer than riding 'round the island making war against Cromwell and his New Model Army. So I'd no difficulty lightening my load, and stuffing my purse, in London. Then I nipped up to Oxford, meaning only to pay a call on John Wilkins and pick up some copies of Cryptonomicon. ' 'What is that?' Ben wants to know. 'A very queer old book, dreadfully thick, and full of nonsense,' says Godfrey. 'Papa uses it to keep the door from blowing shut.' 'It is a compendium of secret codes and cyphers that this chap Wilkins had written some years earlier,' says Enoch. 'In those days, he was Warden of Wadham College, which is part of the University of Oxford. When I arrived, he was steeling himself to make the ultimate sacrifice in the name of Natural Philosophy.' 'He was beheaded?' Ben asks Godfrey: 'Tortured?' Ben: 'Mutilated, like?' 'No: he married Cromwell's sister.' 'But I thought you said there was no Natural Philosophy in those days,' Godfrey complains. 'There was:once a week, in John Wilkins's chambers at Wadham College,' says Enoch. 'For that is where the Experimental Philosophical Clubb met. Christopher Wren, Robert Boyle, Robert Hooke, and others you ought to have heard of. By the time I got there, they'd run out of space and moved to an apothecary's shop – a less flammable environment. It was that apothecary, come to think of it, who exhorted me to make the journey north and pay a call on Mr. Clarke in Grantham.' 'Have we settled on a year yet?' 'I'll settle on one now, Ben. By the time I reached Oxford, that pendulum-clock I'd seen on the table of Huygens's house in the Hague had been perfected, and set into motion. The first clock worthy of the name. Galileo had timed his experiments by counting his pulse or listening to musicians; but after Huygens we used clocks, which – according to some – told absolute time, fixed and invariant. God's time. Huygens published a book about it later; but the clock first began to tick, and the Time of Natural Philosophy began, in the year of Our Lord – ' 1655 For between true science and erroneous doctrines, ignorance is in the middle. – HOBBES, Leviathan IN EVERY KINGDOM , empire, principality, archbishopric, duchy, and electorate Enoch had ever visited, the penalty for transmuting base metals into gold – or trying to – or, in some places, even thinking about it – was death. This did not worry him especially. It was only one of a thousand excuses that rulers kept handy to kill inconvenient persons, and to carry it off in a way that made them look good. For example, if you were in Frankfurt-on-Main, where the Archbishop-Elector von Schönborn and his minister and sidekick Boyneburg were both avid practitioners of the Art, you were probably safe. Cromwell's England was another matter. Since the Puritans had killed the king and taken the place over, Enoch didn't go around that Commonwealth (as they styled it now) in a pointy hat with stars and moons. Not that Enoch the Red had ever been that kind of alchemist anyway. The old stars-and-moons act was a good way to farm the unduly trusting. But the need to raise money in the first place seemed to call into question one's own ability to turn lead into gold. Enoch had made himself something of an expert on longevity. It was only a couple of decades since a Dr. John Lambe had been killed by the mobile in the streets of London. Lambe was a self-styled sorcerer with high connections at Court. The Mobb had convinced themselves that Lambe had conjured up a recent thunderstorm and tornado that had scraped the dirt from graves of some chaps who had perished in the last round of Plague. Not wishing to end up in Lambe's position, Enoch had tried to develop the knack of edging around people's perceptions like one of those dreams that does not set itself firmly in memory, and is flushed into oblivion by the first thoughts and sensations of the day. He'd stayed a week or two in Wilkins's chambers, and attended meetings of the Experimental Philosophical Clubb. This had been a revelation to him, for during the Civil War, practically nothing had been heard out of England. The savants of Leipzig, Paris, and Amsterdam had begun to think of it as a rock in the high Atlantic, overrun by heavily armed preachers. Gazing out Wilkins's windows, studying the northbound traffic, Enoch had been surprised by the number of private traders: adventuresome merchants, taking advantage of the cessation of the Civil War to travel into the country and deal with farmers in the country, buying their produce for less than what it would bring in a city market. They mostly had a Puritan look about them, and Enoch did not especially want to ride in their company. So he'd waited for a full moon and a cloudless night and ridden up to Grantham in the night, arriving before daybreak. THE FRONT OF CLARKE'S HOUSE was tidy, which told Enoch that Mrs. Clarke was still alive. He led his horse round into the stable-yard. Scattered about were cracked mortars and crucibles, stained yellow and vermilion and silver. A columnar furnace, smoke-stained, reigned over coal-piles. It was littered with rinds of hardened dross raked off the tops of crucibles – the fœces of certain alchemical processes, mingled on this ground with the softer excrement of horses and geese. Clarke backed out his side-door embracing a brimming chamber-pot. 'Save it up,' Enoch said, his voice croaky from not having been used in a day or two, 'you can extract much that's interesting from urine.' The apothecary startled, and upon recognizing Enoch he nearly dropped the pot, then caught it, then wished he had dropped it, since these evolutions had set up a complex and dangerous sloshing that must be countervailed by gliding about in a bent-knee gait, melting foot-shaped holes in the frost on the grass, and, as a last resort, tilting the pot when whitecaps were observed. The roosters of Grantham, Lincolnshire, who had slept through Enoch's arrival, came awake and began to celebrate Clarke's performance. The sun had been rolling along the horizon for hours, like a fat waterfowl making its takeoff run. Well before full daylight, Enoch was inside the apothecary's shop, brewing up a potion from boiled water and an exotic Eastern herb. 'Take an amount that will fill the cup of your palm, and throw it in – ' 'The water turns brown already!' “ – remove it from the fire or it will be intolerably bitter. I'll require a strainer.' 'Do you mean to suggest I'm expected to taste it?' 'Not just taste but drink. Don't look so condemned. I've done it for months with no effect.' 'Other than addiction, t'would seem.' 'You are too suspicious. The Mahrattas drink it to the exclusion of all else.' 'So I'm right about the addiction!' 'It is nothing more than a mild stimulant.' 'Mmm . . . not all that bad,' Clarke said later, sipping cautiously. 'What ailments does it cure?' 'None whatsoever.' 'Ah. That's different, then . . . what's it called?' ' Cha,or chai, or the, or tay. I know a Dutch merchant who has several tons of it sitting in a warehouse in Amsterdam . . .' Clarke chuckled. 'Oh, no, Enoch, I'll not be drawn into some foreign trading scheme. This tay is inoffensive enough, but I don't think Englishmen will ever take to anything so outlandish.' 'Very well, then – we'll speak of other commodities.' And, setting down his tay-cup, Enoch reached into his saddle-bags and brought out bags of yellow sulfur he'd collected from a burning mountain in Italy, finger-sized ingots of antimony, heavy flasks of quicksilver, tiny clay crucibles and melting-pots, retorts, spirit-burners, and books with woodcuts showing the design of diverse furnaces. He set them up on the deal tables and counters of the apothecary shop, saying a few words about each one. Clarke stood to one side with his fingers laced together, partly for warmth, and partly just to contain himself from lunging toward the goods. Years had gone by, a Civil War had been prosecuted, and a King's head had rolled in Charing Cross since Clarke had touched some of these items. He imagined that the Continental adepts had been penetrating the innermost secrets of God's creation the entire time. But Enoch knew that the alchemists of Europe were men just like Clarke – hoping, and dreading, that Enoch would return with the news that some English savant, working in isolation, had found the trick of refining, from the base, dark, cold, essentially fœcal matter of which the World was made, the Philosophick Mercury – the pure living essence of God's power and presence in the world – the key to the transmutation of metals, the attainment of immortal life and perfect wisdom. Enoch was less a merchant than a messenger. The sulfur and antimony he brought as favors. He accepted money in order to pay for his expenses. The important cargo was in his mind. He and Clarke talked for hours. Sleepy thumping, footfalls, and piping voices sounded from the attic. The staircase boomed and groaned like a ship in a squall. A maid lit a fire and cooked porridge. Mrs. Clarke roused herself and served it to children – too many of them. 'Has it been that long?' Enoch asked, listening to their chatter from the next room, trying to tally the voices. Clarke said, 'They're not ours.' 'Boarders?' 'Some of the local yeomen send their young ones to my brother's school. We have room upstairs, and my wife is fond of children.' 'Are you?' 'Some more than others.' The young boarders dispatched their porridge and mobbed the exit. Enoch drifted over to a window: a lattice of hand-sized, diamond-shaped panes, each pane greenish, warped, and bubbled. Each pane was a prism, so the sun showered the room with rainbows. The children showed as pink mottles, sliding and leaping from one pane to another, sometimes breaking up and recombining like beads of mercury on a tabletop. But this was simply an exaggeration of how children normally looked to Enoch. One of them, slight and fair-haired, stopped squarely before the window and turned to peer through it. He must have had more acute senses than the others, because he knew that Mr. Clarke had a visitor this morning. Perhaps he'd heard the low murmur of their conversation, or detected an unfamiliar whinny from the stable. Perhaps he was an insomniac who had been studying Enoch through a chink in the wall as Enoch had strolled around the stable-yard before dawn. The boy cupped his hands around his face to block out peripheral sunlight. It seemed that those hands were splashed with colors. From one of them dangled some kind of little project, a toy or weapon made of string. Then another boy called to him and he spun about, too eagerly, and darted away like a sparrow. 'I'd best be going,' Enoch said, not sure why. 'Our brethren in Cambridge must know by now that I've been in Oxford – they'll be frantic.' With steely politeness he turned aside Clarke's amiable delaying-tactics, declining the offer of porridge, postponing the suggestion that they pray together, insisting that he really needed no rest until he reached Cambridge. His horse had had only a few hours to feed and doze. Enoch had borrowed it from Wilkins with the implicit promise to treat it kindly, and so rather than mounting into the saddle he led it by the reins down Grantham's high street and in the direction of the school, chatting to it. He caught sight of the boarders soon enough. They had found stones that needed kicking, dogs that needed fellowship, and a few late apples, still dangling from tree-branches. Enoch lingered in the long shadow of a stone wall and watched the apple project. Some planning had gone into it – a whispered conference between bunks last night. One of the boys had clambered up into the tree and was shinnying out onto the limb in question. It was too slender to bear his weight, but he phant'sied he could bend it low enough to bring it within the tallest boy's jumping-range. The little fair-haired boy adored the tall boy's fruitless jumping. But he was working on his own project, the same one Enoch had glimpsed through the window: a stone on the end of a string. Not an easy thing to make. He whirled the stone around and flung it upwards. It whipped around the end of the tree-branch. By pulling it down he was able to bring the apple within easy reach. The tall boy stood aside grudgingly, but the fair boy kept both hands on that string, and insisted that the tall one have it as a present. Enoch almost groaned aloud when he saw the infatuation on the little boy's face. The tall boy's face was less pleasant to look at. He hungered for the apple but suspected a trick. Finally he lashed out and snatched it. Finding the prize in his hand, he looked searchingly at the fair boy, trying to understand his motives, and became unsettled and sullen. He took a bite of the apple as the other watched with almost physical satisfaction. The boy who'd shinnied out onto the tree-limb had come down, and now managed to tease the string off the branch. He examined the way it was tied to the stone and decided that suspicion was the safest course. 'A pretty lace-maker you are!' he piped. But the fair-haired boy had eyes only for his beloved. Then the tall boy spat onto the ground, and tossed the rest of the apple over a fence into a yard where a couple of pigs fought over it. Now it became unbearable for a while, and made Enoch wish he had never followed them. The two stupid boys dogged the other one down the road, wide eyes traveling up and down his body, seeing him now for the first time – seeing a little of what Enoch saw. Enoch heard snatches of their taunts – “What's on your hands? What'd you say? Paint!? For what? Pretty pictures? What'd you say? For furniture? I haven't seen any furniture. Oh, doll furniture!?' Being a sooty empiric, what was important to Enoch was not these tedious details of specifically how the boy's heart got broken. He went to the apple tree to have a look at the boy's handiwork. The boy had imprisoned the stone in a twine net: two sets of helices, one climbing clockwise, the other anti-clockwise, intersecting each other in a pattern of diamonds, just like the lead net that held Clarke's window together. Enoch didn't suppose that this was a coincidence. The work was irregular at the start, but by the time he'd completed the first row of knots the boy had learned to take into account the length of twine spent in making the knots themselves, and by the time he reached the end, it was as regular as the precession of the zodiac. Enoch then walked briskly to the school and arrived in time to watch the inevitable fight. The fair boy was red-eyed and had porridge-vomit on his chin – it was safe to assume he'd been punched in the stomach. Another schoolboy – there was one in every school – seemed to have appointed himself master of ceremonies, and was goading them to action, paying most attention to the smaller boy, the injured party and presumed loser-to-be of the fight. To the surprise and delight of the community of young scholars, the smaller boy stepped forward and raised his fists. Enoch approved, so far. Some pugnacity in the lad would be useful. Talent was not rare; the ability to survive having it was. Then combat was joined. Not many punches were thrown. The small boy did something clever, down around the tall boy's knees, that knocked him back on his arse. Almost immediately the little boy's knee was in the other's groin, then in the pit of his stomach, and then on his throat. And then, suddenly, the tall boy was struggling to get up – but only because the fair-haired boy was trying to rip both of his ears off. Like a farmer dragging an ox by his nose-ring, the smaller boy led the bigger one over to the nearest stone wall, which happened to be that of Grantham's huge, ancient church, and then began to rub his prisoner's face against it as though trying to erase it from the skull. Until this point the other boys had been jubilant. Even Enoch had found the early stages of the victory stirring in a way. But as this torture went on, the boys' faces went slack. Many of them turned and ran away. The fair-haired boy had flown into a state of something like ecstasy – groping and flailing like a man nearing erotic climax, his body an insufficient vehicle for his passions, a dead weight impeding the flowering of the spirit. Finally an adult man – Clarke's brother? – banged out through a door and stormed across the yard between school and church in the tottering gait of a man unaccustomed to having to move quickly, carrying a cane but not touching the ground with it. He was so angry that he did not utter a word, or try to separate the boys, but simply began to cut air with the cane, like a blind man fending off a bear, as he got close. Soon enough he maneuvered within range of the fair boy and planted his feet and bent to his work, the cane producing memorable whorling noises cut off by pungent whacks. A few brown-nosers now considered it safe to approach. Two of them dragged the fair boy off of his victim, who contracted into a fetal position at the base of the church wall, hands open like the covers of a book to enfold his wrecked face. The schoolmaster adjusted his azimuth as the target moved, like a telescope tracking a comet, but none of his blows seemed to have been actually felt by the fair boy yet – he wore a look of steadfast, righteous triumph, much like Enoch supposed Cromwell must have shown as he beheld the butchering of the Irish at Drogheda. The boy was dragged inside for higher punishments. Enoch rode back to Clarke's apothecary shop, reining in a silly urge to gallop through the town like a Cavalier. Clarke was sipping tay and gnawing biscuits, already several pages into a new alchemical treatise, moving crumb-spattered lips as he solved the Latin. 'Who is he?' Enoch demanded, coming in the door. Clarke elected to play innocent. Enoch crossed the room and found the stairs. He didn't really care about the name anyway. It would just be another English name. The upstairs was all one odd-shaped room with low adze-marked rafters and rough plaster walls that had once been whitewashed. Enoch hadn't visited many children's rooms, but to him it seemed like a den of thieves hastily abandoned and stumbled upon by a plodding constable, filled with evidence of many peculiar, ingenious, frequently unwise plots and machinations suddenly cut short. He stopped in the doorway and steadied himself. Like a good empiric, he had to see all and alter nothing. The walls were marked with what his eyes first took to be the grooves left behind by a careless plasterer's trowel, but as his pupils dilated, he understood that Mr. and Mrs. Clarke's boarders had been drawing on the walls, apparently with bits of charcoal fetched out of the grate. It was plain to see which pictures had been drawn by whom. Most were caricatures learned by rote from slightly older children. Others – generally closer to the floor – were maps of insight, manifestoes of intelligence, always precise, sometimes beautiful. Enoch had been right in supposing that the boy had excellent senses. Things that others did not see at all, or chose not to register out of some kind of mental obstinacy, this boy took in avidly. There were four tiny beds. The litter of toys on the floor was generally boyish, but over by one bed there was a tendency toward ribbons and frills. Clarke had mentioned one of the boarders was a girl. There was a dollhouse and a clan of rag dolls in diverse phases of ontogeny. Here there'd been a meeting of interests. There was doll furniture ingeniously made by the same regular mind and clever hands that had woven the net round the stone. The boy had made stalks of grass into rattan tables, and willow twigs into rocking-chairs. The alchemist in him had been at work copying recipes from that old corrupter of curious youths, Bates's The Mysteries of Nature & Art, extracting pigments from plants and formulating paints. He had tried to draw sketches of the other boys while they were sleeping – the only time they could be relied on to hold still and not behave abominably. He did not yet have the skill to make a regular portrait, but from time to time the Muse would take hold of his hand, and in a fortunate sweep of the arm he'd capture something beautiful in the curve of a jawbone or an eyelash. There were broken and dismantled parts of machines that Enoch did not understand. Later, though, perusing the notebook where the boy had been copying out recipes, Enoch found sketches of the hearts of rats and birds that the boy had apparently dissected. Then the little machines made sense. For what was the heart but the model for the perpetual motion machine? And what was the perpetual motion machine but Man's attempt to make a thing that would do what the heart did? To harness the heart's occult power and bend it to use. The apothecary had joined him in the room. Clarke looked nervous. 'You're up to something clever, aren't you?' Enoch said. 'By that, do you mean – ' 'He came your way by chance?' 'Not precisely. His mother knows my wife. I had seen the boy.' 'And seen that he had promise – as how could you not.' 'He lacks a father. I made a recommendation to the mother. She is steady. Intermittently decent. Quasi-literate . . .' 'But too thick to know what she has begotten?' 'Oh my, yes.' 'So you took the boy under your wing – and if he's shown some interest in the Art you have not discouraged it.' 'Of course not! He could be the one, Enoch.' 'He's not the one,' Enoch said. 'Not the one you are thinking of. Oh, he will be a great empiricist. He will, perhaps, be the one to accomplish some great thing we have never imagined.' 'Enoch, what can you possibly be talking about?' It made his head ache. How was he to explain it without making Clarke out to be a fool, and himself a swindler? 'Something is happening.' Clarke pursed his lips and waited for something a little more specific. 'Galileo and Descartes were only harbingers. Something is happening now – the mercury is rising in the ground, like water climbing up the bore of a well.' Enoch couldn't get Oxford out of his mind – Hooke and Wren and Boyle, all exchanging thoughts so quickly that flames practically leaped between them. He decided to try another tack. 'There's a boy in Leipzig like this one. Father died recently, leaving him nothing except a vast library. The boy began reading those books. Only six years old.' 'It's not unheard-of for six-year-olds to read.' 'German, Latin, and Greek?' 'With proper instruction – ' 'That's just it. The boy's teachers prevailed on the mother to lock the child out of the library. I got wind of it. Talked to the mother, and secured a promise from her that little Gottfried would be allowed free run of the books. He taught himself Latin and Greek in the space of a year.' Clarke shrugged. 'Very well. Perhaps little Gottfried is the one.' Enoch then should've known it was hopeless, but he tried again: 'We are empiricists – we scorn the Scholastic way of memorizing old books and rejecting what is new – and that is good. But in pinning our hopes on the Philosophick Mercury we have decided in advance what it is that we seek to discover, and that is never right.' This merely made Clarke nervous. Enoch tried yet another tack: 'I have in my saddlebags a copy of Principia Philosophica, the last thing Descartes wrote before he died. Dedicated to young Elizabeth, the Winter Queen's daughter . . .' Clarke was straining to look receptive, like a dutiful university student still intoxicated from last night's recreations at the tavern. Enoch remembered the stone on the string, and decided to aim for something more concrete. 'Huygens has made a clock that is regulated by a pendulum.' 'Huygens?' 'A young Dutch savant. Not an alchemist.' 'Oh!' 'He has worked out a way to make a pendulum that will always go back and forth in the same amount of time. By connecting it to the internal workings of a clock, he has wrought a perfectly regular time-piece. Its ticks divide infinity, as calipers step out leagues on a map. With these two – clock and calipers – we can measure both extent and duration. And this, combined with the new method of analysis of Descartes, gives us a way to describe Creation and perhaps to predict the future.' 'Ah, I see!' Clarke said. 'So this Huygens – he is some kind of astrologer?' 'No, no, no! He is neither astrologer nor alchemist. He is something new. More like him will follow. Wilkins, down in Oxford, is trying to bring them together. Their achievements may exceed those of alchemists.' If they did not, Enoch thought, he'd be chagrined. 'I am suggesting to you that this little boy may turn out to be another one like Huygens.' 'You want me to steer him away from the Art?' Clarke exclaimed. 'Not if he shows interest. But beyond that do not steer him at all – let him pursue his own conclusions.' Enoch looked at the faces and diagrams on the wall, noting some rather good perspective work. 'And see to it that mathematics is brought to his attention.' 'I do not think that he has the temperament to be a mere computer,' Clarke warned. 'Sitting at his pages day after day, drudging out tables of logarithms, cube roots, cosines – ' 'Thanks to Descartes, there are other uses for mathematics now,' Enoch said. 'Tell your brother to show the boy Euclid and let him find his own way.' THE CONVERSATION MIGHT NOT HAVE gone precisely this way. Enoch had the same way with his memories as a ship's master with his rigging – a compulsion to tighten what was slack, mend what was frayed, caulk what leaked, and stow, or throw overboard, what was to no purpose. So the conversation with Clarke might have wandered into quite a few more blind alleys than he remembered. A great deal of time was probably spent on politeness. Certainly it took up most of that short autumn day. Because Enoch didn't ride out of Grantham until late. He passed by the school one more time on his way down towards Cambridge. All the boys had gone home by that hour save one, who'd been made to stay behind and, as punishment, scrub and scrape his own name off the various windowsills and chair-backs where he'd inscribed it. These infractions had probably been noticed by Clarke's brother, who had saved them up for the day when the child would need particular discipline. The sun, already low at mid-afternoon, was streaming into the open windows. Enoch drew up along the northwest side of the school so that anyone who looked back at him would see only a long hooded shadow, and watched the boy work for a while. The sun was crimson in the boy's face, which was ruddy to begin with from his exertions with the scrub-brush. Far from being reluctant, he seemed enthusiastic about the job of erasing all traces of himself from the school – as if the tumbledown place was unworthy to bear his mark. One windowsill after another came under him and was wiped clean of the name I. NEWTON. Newtowne, Massachusetts Bay Colony OCTOBER 12, 1713 How are these Colonies of the English increas'd and improv'd, even to such a Degree, that some have suggested, tho' not for Want of Ignorance, a Danger of their revolting from the English Government, and setting up an Independency of Power for themselves. It is true, the Notion is absurd, and without Foundation, but serves to confirm what I have said above of the real Encrease of those Colonies, and of the flourishing Condition of the Commerce carried on there. – DANIEL DEFOE, A Plan of the English Commerce SOMETIMES IT SEEMS AS IF everyone'simmigrating to America – sailing-ships on the North Atlantic as thick as watermen's boats on the Thames, more or less wearing ruts in the sea-lanes – and so, in an idle way, Enoch supposes that his appearance on the threshold of the Massachusetts Bay Colony Institute of Technologickal Arts will come as no surprise at all to its founder. But Daniel Waterhouse nearly swallows his teeth when Enoch walks through the door, and it's not just because the hem of Enoch's cloak knocks over a great teetering stack of cards. For a moment Enoch's afraid that some sort of apoplectic climax is in progress, and that Dr. Waterhouse's final contribution to the Royal Society, after nearly a lifetime of service, will be a traumatically deranged cardiac muscle, pickled in spirits of wine in a crystal jug. The Doctor spends the first minute of their interview frozen halfway between sitting and standing, with his mouth open and his left hand on his breastbone. This might be the beginnings of a courteous bow, or a hasty maneuver to conceal, beneath his coat, a shirt so work-stained as to cast aspersions on his young wife's diligence. Or perhaps it's a philosophick enquiry, viz. checking his own pulse – if so, it's good news, because Sir John Floyer just invented the practice, and if Daniel Waterhouse knows of it, it means he's been keeping up with the latest work out of London. Enoch takes advantage of the lull to make other observations and try to judge empirically whether Daniel's as unsound as the faculty of Harvard College would have him believe. From the Doctors' jibes on the ferry-ride, Enoch had expected nothing but cranks and gears. And indeed Waterhouse does have a mechanic's shop in a corner of the – how will Enoch characterize this structure to the Royal Society? 'Log cabin,' while technically correct, calls to mind wild men in skins. 'Sturdy, serviceable, and in no way extravagant laboratory making ingenious use of indigenous building materials.' There. But anyway, most of it is given over not to the hard ware of gears, but to softer matters: cards. They are stacked in slender columns that would totter in the breeze from a moth's wings if the columns had not been jammed together into banks, stairways, and terraces, the whole formation built on a layer of loose tiles on the dirt floor to (Enoch guesses) prevent the card-stacks from wicking up the copious ground-water. Edging farther into the room and peering round a bulwark of card-stacks, Enoch finds a writing-desk stocked with blank cards. Ragged gray quills project from inkpots, bent and broken ones crosshatch the floor, bits of down and fluff and cartilage and other bird-wreckage form a dandruffy layer on everything. On pretext of cleaning up his mess, Enoch begins to pick the spilled cards off the floor. Each is marked at the top with a rather large number, always odd, and beneath it a long row of ones and zeroes, which (since the last digit is always 1, indicating an odd number) he takes to be nothing other then the selfsame number expressed in the binary notation lately perfected by Leibniz. Underneath the number, then, is a word or short phrase, a different one on each card. As he picks them up and re-stacks them he sees: Noah's Ark; Treaties terminating wars; Membranophones (e.g., mirlitons); The notion of a classless society; The pharynx and its outgrowths; Drawing instruments (e.g., T-squares); The Skepticism of Pyrrhon of Elis; Requirements for valid maritime insurance contracts; The Kamakura bakufu; The fallacy of Assertion without Knowledge; Agates; Rules governing the determination of questions of fact in Roman civil courts; Mummification; Sunspots; The sex organs of bryophytes (e.g., liverwort); Euclidean geometry – homotheties and similitudes; Pantomime; The Election & Reign of Rudolf of Hapsburg; Testes; Nonsymmetrical dyadic relations; the Investiture Controversy; Phosphorus; Traditional impotence remedies; the Arminian heresy; and – 'Some of these strike one as being too complicated for monads,' he says, desperate for some way to break the ice. 'Such as this – ‘The Development of Portuguese Hegemony over Central Africa.' “ 'Look at the number at the top of that card,' Waterhouse says. 'It is the product of five primes: one for development, one for Portuguese, one for Hegemony, one for Central, and one for Africa. ' 'Ah, so it's not a monad at all, but a composite.' 'Yes.' 'It's difficult to tell when the cards are helter-skelter. Don't you think you should organize them?' 'According to what scheme?' Waterhouse asks shrewdly. 'Oh, no, I'll not be tricked into that discussion.' 'No linear indexing system is adequate to express the multi-dimensionality of knowledge,' Dr. Waterhouse reminds him. 'But if each one is assigned a unique number – prime numbers for monads, and products of primes for composites – then organizing them is simply a matter of performing computations . . . Mr. Root. ' 'Dr. Waterhouse. Pardon the interruption.' 'Not at all.' He sits back down, finally, and goes back to what he was doing before: running a long file back and forth over a chunk of metal with tremendous sneezing noises. 'It is a welcome diversion to have you appear before me, so unlooked-for, so implausibly well-preserved, ' he shouts over the keening of the warm tool and the ringing of the work-piece. 'Durability is preferable to the alternative – but not always convenient. Less hale persons are forever sending me off on errands.' 'Lengthy and tedious ones at that.' 'The journey's dangers, discomforts, and tedium are more than compensated for by the sight of you, so productively occupied, and in such good health.' Or something like that. This is the polite part of the conversation, which is not likely to last much longer. If he had returned the compliment, Daniel would have scoffed, because no one would say he's well preserved in the sense that Enoch is. He looks as old as he ought to. But he's wiry, with clear, sky-blue eyes, no tremors in his jaw or his hands, no hesitation in his speech once he's over the shock of seeing Enoch (or, perhaps, anyone ) in his Institute. Daniel Waterhouse is almost completely bald, with a fringe of white hair clamping the back of his head like wind-hammered snow on a tree-trunk. He makes no apologies for being uncovered and does not reach for a wig – indeed, appears not to own one. His eyes are large, wide and staring in a way that probably does nothing to improve his reputation. Those orbs flank a hawkish nose that nearly conceals the slot-like mouth of a miser biting down on a suspect coin. His ears are elongated and have grown a radiant fringe of lanugo. The imbalance between his organs of input and output seems to say that he sees and knows more than he'll say. 'Are you a colonist now, or – ' 'I'm here to see you.' The eyes stare back, knowing and calm. 'So it is a social visit! That is heroic – when a simple exchange of letters is so much less fraught with seasickness, pirates, scurvy, mass drownings – ' 'Speaking of letters – I've one here,' Enoch says, taking it out. 'Great big magnificent seal. Someone dreadfully important must've written it. Can't say how impressed I am.' 'Personal friend of Dr. Leibniz.' 'The Electress Sophie?' 'No, the other one.' 'Ah. What does Princess Caroline want of me? Must be something appalling, or else she wouldn't've sent you to chivvy me along.' Dr. Waterhouse is embarrassed at having been so startled earlier and is making up for it with peevishness. But it's fine, because it seems to Enoch that the thirty-year-old Waterhouse hidden inside the old man is now pressing outward against the loose mask of skin, like a marble sculpture informing its burlap wrappings. 'Think of it as coaxing you forward. Dr. Waterhouse! Let's find a tavern and – ' 'We'll find a tavern – after I've had an answer. What does she want of me?' 'The same thing as ever.' Dr. Waterhouse shrinks – the inner thirty-year-old recedes, and he becomes just an oddly familiar-looking gaffer. 'Should've known. What other use is there for a broken-down old computational monadologist?' 'It's remarkable.' 'What?' 'I've known you for – what – thirty or forty years now, almost as long as you've known Leibniz. I've seen you in some unenviable spots. But in all that time, I don't believe I've ever heard you whine, until just then.' Daniel considers this carefully, then actually laughs. 'My apologies.' 'Not at all!' 'I thought my work would be appreciated here. I was going to establish what, to Harvard, would've been what Gresham's College was to Oxford. Imagined I'd find a student body, or at least a protégé. Someone who could help me build the Logic Mill. Hasn't worked out that way. All of the mechanically talented sorts are dreaming of steam-engines. Ludicrous! What's wrong with water-wheels? Plenty of rivers here. Look, there's a little one right between your feet!' 'Engines are naturally more interesting to the young.' 'You needn't tell me. When I was a student, a prism was a wonder. Went to Sturbridge Fair with Isaac to buy them – little miracles wrapped in velvet. Played with 'em for months.' 'This fact is now widely known.' 'Now the lads are torn every direction at once, like a prisoner being quartered. Or eighthed, or sixteenthed. I can already see it happening to young Ben out there, and soon it'll happen to my own boy. ‘Should I study mathematics? Euclidean or Cartesian? Newtonian or Leibnizian calculus? Or should I go the empirical route? Will it be dissecting animals then, or classifying weeds, or making strange matters in crucibles? Rolling balls down inclined planes? Sporting with electricity and magnets?' Against that, what's in my shack here to interest them?' 'Could this lack of interest have something to do with that everyone knows the project was conceived by Leibniz?' 'I'm not doing it his way. His plan was to use balls running down troughs to represent the binary digits, and pass them through mechanical gates to perform the logical operations. Ingenious, but not very practical. I'm using pushrods.' 'Superficial. I ask again: could your lack of popularity here be related to that all Englishmen believe that Leibniz is a villain – a plagiarist?' 'This is an unnatural turn in the conversation, Mr. Root. Are you being devious?' 'Only a little.' 'You and your Continental ways.' 'It's just that the priority dispute has lately turned vicious.' 'Knew it would happen.' 'I don't think you appreciate just how unpleasant it is.' 'You don't appreciate how well I know Sir Isaac.' 'I'm saying that its repercussions may extend to here, to this very room, and might account for your (forgive me for mentioning this) solitude, and slow progress.' 'Ludicrous!' 'Have you seen the latest flying letters, speeding about Europe unsigned, undated, devoid of even a printer's mark? The anonymous reviews, planted, like sapper's mines, in the journals of the savants? Sudden unmaskings of hitherto unnamed ‘leading mathematicians' forced to own, or deny, opinions they have long disseminated in private correspondence? Great minds who, in any other era, would be making discoveries of Copernican significance, reduced to acting as cat's-paws and hired leg-breakers for the two principals? New and deservedly obscure journals suddenly elevated to the first rank of learned discourse, simply because some lackey has caused his latest stiletto-thrust to be printed in its back pages? Challenge problems flying back and forth across the Channel, each one fiendishly devised to prove that Leibniz's calculus is the original, and Newton's but a shoddy counterfeit, or vice versa? Reputations tossed about on points of swords – ' 'No,' Daniel says. 'I moved here to get away from European intrigues.' His eyes drop to the Letter. Enoch can't help looking at it, too. 'It is purely an anomaly of fate,' Enoch says, 'that Gottfried, as a young man, lacking means, seeking a position – anything that would give him the simple freedom to work – landed in the court of an obscure German Duke. Who through intricate and tedious lacework of marryings, couplings, dyings, religious conversions, wars, revolutions, miscarriages, decapitations, congenital feeble-mindedness, excommunications, et cetera among Europe's elite – most notably, the deaths of all seventeen of Queen Anne's children – became first in line to the Throne of England and Scotland, or Great Britain as we're supposed to call it now.' ' Somewould call it fate. Others – ' 'Let's not get into that. ' 'Agreed.' 'Anne's in miserable health, the House of Hanover is packing up its pointed helmets and illustrated beer-mugs, and taking English lessons. Sophie may get to be Queen of England yet, at least for a short while. But soon enough, George Louis will become Newton's King and – as Sir Isaac is still at the Mint – his boss.' 'I take your point. It is most awkward.' 'George Louis is the embodiment of awkwardness – he doesn't care, and scarcely knows, and would probably think it amusing if he did. But his daughter-in-law the Princess – author of this letter – in time likely to become Queen of England herself – is a friend of Leibniz. And yet an admirer of Newton. She wants a reconciliation.' 'She wants a dove to fly between the Pillars of Hercules. Which are still runny with the guts of the previous several peace-makers.' 'It's supposed that you are different.' 'Herculean, perhaps?' 'Well . . .' 'Do you have any idea why I'm different, Mr. Root?' 'I do not, Dr. Waterhouse.' 'The tavern it is, then.' BEN AND GODFREY ARE SENT back to Boston on the ferry. Daniel scorns the nearest tavern – some sort of long-running dispute with the proprietor – so they find the highway and ride northwest for a couple of miles, drawing off to one side from time to time to let drovers bring their small herds of Boston-bound cattle through. They arrive at what used to be the capital of Massachusetts, before the city fathers of Boston out-maneuvered it. Several roads lunge out of the wilderness and collide with one another. Yeomen and drovers and backwoodsmen churn it up into a vortex of mud and manure. Next to it is a College. Newtowne is, in other words, paradise for tavern-keepers, and the square (as they style it) is lined with public houses. Waterhouse enters a tavern but immediately backs out of it. Looking into the place over his companion's shoulder, Enoch glimpses a white-wigged Judge on a massive chair at the head of the tap-room, a jury empaneled on plank benches, a grimy rogue being interrogated. 'Not a good place for a pair of idlers,' Waterhouse mumbles. 'You hold judicial proceedings in drinking-houses !?' 'Poh! That judge is no more drunk than any magistrate of the Old Bailey.' 'It is perfectly logical when you put it that way.' Daniel chooses another tavern. They walk through its brick-red door. A couple of leather fire-buckets dangle by the entrance, in accordance with safety regulations, and a bootjack hangs on the wall so that the innkeeper can take his guests' footwear hostage at night. The proprietor is bastioned in a little wooden fort in the corner, bottles on shelves behind him, a preposterous firearm, at least six feet long, leaning in the angle of the walls. He's busy sorting his customers' mail. Enoch cannot believe the size of the planks that make up the floor. They creak and pop like ice on a frozen lake as people move around. Waterhouse leads him to a table. It consists of a single slab of wood sawn from the heart of a tree that must have been at least three feet in diameter. 'Trees such as these have not been seen in Europe for hundreds of years,' Enoch says. He measures it against the length of his arm. 'Should have gone straight to Her Majesty's Navy. I am shocked.' 'There is an exemption to that rule,' Waterhouse says, showing for the first time a bit of good humor. 'If a tree is blown down by the wind, anyone may salvage it. In consequence of which, Gomer Bolstrood, and his fellow Barkers, have built their colonies in remote places, where the trees are very large – ' 'And where freak hurricanoes often strike without warning?' 'And without being noticed by any of their neighbors. Yes.' 'Firebrands to furniture-makers in a single generation. I wonder what old Knott would think.' 'Firebrands and furniture-makers,' Waterhouse corrects him. 'Ah, well . . . If my name were Bolstrood, I'd be happy to live anywhere that was beyond the reach of Tories and Archbishops.' Daniel Waterhouse rises and goes over to the fireplace, plucks a couple of loggerheads from their hooks, and thrusts them angrily into the coals. Then he goes to the corner and speaks with the tavern-keeper, who cracks two eggs into two mugs and then begins throwing in rum and bitters and molasses. It is sticky and complicated – as is the entire situation here that Enoch's gotten himself into. There's a similar room on the other side of the wall, reserved for the ladies. Spinning wheels whirr, cards chafe against wool. Someone begins tuning up a bowed instrument. Not the old-fashioned viol, but (judging from its sound) a violin. Hard to believe, considering where he is. But then the musician begins to play – and instead of a Baroque minuet, it is a weird keening sort of melody – an Irish tune, unless he's mistaken. It's like using watered silk to make grain sacks – the Londoners would laugh until tears ran down their faces. Enoch goes and peers through the doorway to make sure he's not imagining it. Indeed, a girl with carrot-colored hair is playing a violin, entertaining some other women who are spinning and sewing, and the women and the music are as Irish as the day is long. Enoch goes back to the table, shaking his head. Daniel Waterhouse slides a hot loggerhead into each mug, warming and thickening the drinks. Enoch sits down, takes a sip of the stuff, and decides he likes it. Even the music is beginning to grow on him. He cannot look in any direction without seeing eyeballs just in the act of glancing away from them. Some of the other patrons actually run down the road to other taverns to advertise their presence here, as if Root and Waterhouse were a public entertainment. Dons and students saunter in nonchalantly, as if it's normal to stand up in mid-pint and move along to a different establishment. 'Where'd you get the idea you were escaping from intrigue?' Daniel ignores this, too busy glaring at the other customers. 'My father, Drake, educated me for one reason alone,' Daniel finally says. 'To assist him in his preparations for the Apocalypse. He reckoned it would occur in the year 1666 – Number of the Beast and all that. I was, therefore, produced in 1646 – as always, Drake's timing was carefully thought out. When I came of age, I would be a man of the cloth, with the full university education, well versed in many dead classical languages, so that I could stand on the Cliffs of Dover and personally welcome Jesus Christ back to England in fluent Aramaic. Sometimes I look about myself – ' he waves his arm at the tavern “ – and see the way it turned out, and wonder whether my father could possibly have been any more wrong.' 'I think this is a good place for you,' Enoch says. 'Nothing here is going according to plan. The music. The furniture. It's all contrary to expectations.' 'My father and I took in the execution of Hugh Peters – Cromwell's chaplain – in London one day. We rode straight from that spectacle to Cambridge. Since executions are customarily held at daybreak, you see, an industrious Puritan can view one and yet get in a full day's hard traveling and working before evening prayers. It was done with a knife. Drake wasn't shaken at all by the sight of Brother Hugh's intestines. It only made him that much more determined to get me into Cambridge. We went there and called upon Wilkins at Trinity College.' 'Hold, my memory fails – wasn't Wilkins at Oxford ? Wadham College?' 'Anno 1656 he married Robina. Cromwell's sister.' ' ThatI remember.' 'Cromwell made him Master of Trinity College in Cambridge. But of course that was undone by the Restoration. So he only served in that post for a few months – it's no wonder you've forgotten it.' 'Very well. Pardon the interruption. Drake took you up to Cambridge – ?' 'And we called on Wilkins. I was fourteen. Father went off and left us alone, secure in the knowledge that this man – Cromwell's Brother-in-Law, for God's sake! – would lead me down the path of righteousness – perhaps explicate some Bible verses about nine- headed beasts with me, perhaps pray for Hugh Peters.' 'You did neither, I presume.' 'You must imagine a great chamber in Trinity, a gothickal stone warren, like the underbelly of some ancient cathedral, ancient tables scattered about, stained and burnt alchemically, beakers and retorts clouded with residues pungent and bright, but most of all, the books – brown wads stacked like cordwood – more books than I'd ever seen in one room. It was a decade or two since Wilkins had written his great Cryptonomicon. In the course of that project, he had, of course, gathered tomes on occult writing from all over the world, compiling all that had been known, since the time of the Ancients, about the writing of secrets. The publication of that book had brought him fame among those who study such things. Copies were known to have circulated as far as Peking, Lima, Isfahan, Shahjahanabad. Consequently more books yet had been sent to him, from Portuguese crypto-Kabbalists, Arabic savants skulking through the ruins and ashes of Alexandria, Parsees who secretly worship at the altar of Zoroaster, Armenian merchants who must communicate all across the world, in a kind of net-work of information, through subtle signs and symbols hidden in the margins and the ostensible text of letters so cleverly that a competitor, intercepting the message, could examine it and find nothing but trivial chatter – yet a fellow-Armenian could extract the vital data as easy as you or I would read a hand-bill in the street. Secret code-systems of Mandarins, too, who because of their Chinese writing cannot use cyphers as we do, but must hide messages in the position of characters on the sheet, and other means so devious that whole lifetimes must have gone into thinking of them. All of these things had come to him because of the fame of the Cryptonomicon, and to appreciate my position, you must understand that I'd been raised, by Drake and Knott and the others, to believe that every word and character of these books was Satanic. That, if I were to so much as lift the cover of one of these books, and expose my eyes to the occult characters within, I'd be sucked down into Tophet just like that.' 'I can see it made quite an impression on you – ' 'Wilkins let me sit in a chair for half an hour just to soak the place in. Then we began mucking about in his chambers, and set fire to a tabletop. Wilkins was reading some proofs of Boyle's The Skeptical Chemist – you should read it sometime, Enoch, by the way – ' 'I'm familiar with its contents.' 'Wilkins and I were idly trying to reproduce one of Boyle's experiments when things got out of hand. Fortunately no serious damage was done. It wasn't a serious fire, but it accomplished what Wilkins wanted it to: wrecked the mask of etiquette that Drake had set over me, and set my tongue a-run. I must have looked as if I'd gazed upon the face of God. Wilkins let slip that, if it was an actual education I was looking for, there was this thing down in London called Gresham's College where he and a few of his old Oxford cronies were teaching Natural Philosophy directly, without years and years of tedious Classical nincompoopery as prerequisite. 'Now, I was too young to even think of being devious. Even had I practiced to be clever, I'd have had second thoughts doing it in that room. So I simply told Wilkins the truth: I had no interest in religion, at least as a profession, and wanted only to be a natural philosopher like Boyle or Huygens. But of course Wilkins had already discerned this. ‘Leave it in my hands,' he said, and winked at me. 'Drake would not hear of sending me to Gresham's, so two years later I enrolled at that old vicar-mill: Trinity College, Cambridge. Father believed that I did so in fulfillment of his plan for me. Wilkins meanwhile had come up with his own plan for my life. And so you see, Enoch, I am well accustomed to others devising hare-brained plans for how I am to live. That is why I have come to Massachusetts, and why I do not intend to leave it.' 'Your intentions are your own business. I merely ask that you read the letter,' Enoch says. 'What sudden event caused you to be sent here, Enoch? A falling-out between Sir Isaac and a young protégé?' 'Remarkable guesswork!' 'It's no more a guess than when Halley predicted the return of the comet. Newton's bound by his own laws. He's been working on the second edition of the Principia with that young fellow, what's-his-name . . .' 'Roger Cotes.' 'Promising, fresh-faced young lad, is he?' 'Fresh-faced, beyond doubt,' Enoch says, 'promising, until . . .' 'Until he made some kind of a misstep, and Newton flew into a rage, and flung him into the Lake of Fire.' 'Apparently. Now, all that Cotes was working on – the revised Principia Mathematica and some kind of reconciliation with Leibniz – is ruined, or at least stopped.' 'Isaac never cast me into the Lake of Fire,' Daniel muses. 'I was so young and so obviously innocent – he could never think the worst of me, as he does of everyone else.' 'Thank you for reminding me! Please.' Enoch shoves the letter across the table. Daniel breaks the seal and hauls it open. He fishes spectacles from a pocket and holds them up to his face with one hand, as if actually fitting them over his ears would imply some sort of binding commitment. At first he locks his elbow to regard the whole letter as a work of calligraphic art, admiring its graceful loops and swirls. 'Thank God it's not written in those barbarous German letters,' he says. Finally the elbow bends, and he gets down to actually reading it. As he nears the bottom of the first page, a transformation comes over Daniel's face. 'As you have probably noted,' Enoch says, 'the Princess, fully appreciating the hazards of a trans-Atlantic voyage, has arranged an insurance policy . . .' 'A posthumous bribe!' Daniel says. 'The Royal Society is infested with actuaries and statisticians nowadays – drawing up tables for those swindlers at the ‘Change. You must have ‘run the numbers' and computed the odds of a man my age surviving a voyage across the Atlantic; months or even years in that pestilential metropolis; and a journey back to Boston.' 'Daniel! We most certainly did not ‘run the numbers.' It's only reasonable for the Princess to insure you.' 'At this amount? This is a pension – a legacy:for my wife and my son.' 'Do you have a pension now, Daniel?' 'What!? Compared to this, I have nothing.' Flicking one nail angrily upon a train of zeroes inscribed in the heart of the letter. 'Then it seems as if Her Royal Highness is making a persuasive case.' Waterhouse has just, at this instant, realized that very soon he is going to climb aboard ship and sail for London. That much can be read from his face. But he's still an hour or two away from admitting it. They will be difficult hours for Enoch. 'Even without the insurance policy,' Enoch says, 'it would be in your best interests. Natural philosophy, like war and romance, is best done by young men. Sir Isaac has not done any creative work since he had that mysterious catastrophe in '93.' 'It's not mysterious to me. ' 'Since then, it's been toiling at the Mint, and working up new versions of old books, and vomiting flames at Leibniz.' 'And you are advising me to emulate that ?' 'I am advising you to put down the file, pack up your cards, step back from the workbench, and consider the future of the revolution.' 'What revolution can you possibly be talking about? There was the Glorious one back in '88, and people are nattering on about throwing one here, but . . .' 'Don't be disingenuous, Daniel. You speak and think in a language that did not exist when you and Sir Isaac entered Trinity.' 'Fine, fine. If you want to call it a revolution, I won't quibble.' 'That revolution is turning on itself now. The calculus dispute is becoming a schism between the natural philosophers of the Continent and those of Great Britain. The British have far more to lose. Already there's a reluctance to use Leibniz's techniques – which are now more advanced, since he actually bothered to disseminate his ideas. Your difficulties in starting the Massachusetts Bay Colony Institute of Technologickal Arts are a symptom of the same ailment. So do not lurk on the fringes of civilization trifling with cards and cranks, Dr. Waterhouse. Return to the core, look at first causes, heal the central wound. If you can accomplish that, why, then, by the time your son is of an age to become a student, the Institute will no longer be a log cabin sinking into the mire, but a campus of domed pavilions and many-chambered laboratories along the banks of the River Charles, where the most ingenious youth of America will convene to study and refine the art of automatic computation!' Dr. Waterhouse is favoring him with a look of bleak pity usually directed toward uncles too far gone to know they are incontinent. 'Or at least I might catch a fever and die three days from now and provide Faith and Godfrey with a comfortable pension.' 'There's that added inducement.' TO BE A EUROPEAN CHRISTIAN (the rest of the world might be forgiven for thinking) was to build ships and sail them to any and all coasts not already a-bristle with cannons, make landfall at river's mouth, kiss the dirt, plant a cross or a flag, scare the hell out of any indigenes with a musketry demo', and – having come so far, and suffered and risked so much – unpack a shallow basin and scoop up some muck from the river-bottom. Whirled about, the basin became a vortex, shrouded in murk for a few moments as the silt rose into the current like dust from a cyclone. But as that was blown away by the river's current, the shape of the vortex was revealed. In its middle was an eye of dirt that slowly disintegrated from the outside in as lighter granules were shouldered to the outside and cast off. Left in the middle was a huddle of nodes, heavier than all the rest. Blue eyes from far away attended to these, for sometimes they were shiny and yellow. Now, ‘twere easy to call such men stupid (not even broaching the subjects of greedy, violent, arrogant, et cetera ), for there was something wilfully idiotic in going to an unknown country, ignoring its people, their languages, art, its beasts and butterflies, flowers, herbs, trees, ruins, et cetera, and reducing it all to a few lumps of heavy matter in the center of a dish. Yet as Daniel, in the tavern, tries to rake together his early memories of Trinity and of Cambridge, he's chagrined to find that a like process has been going on within his skull for half a century. The impressions he received in those years had been as infinitely various as what confronted a Conquistador when he dragged his longboat up onto an uncharted shore. Bewilderment, in its ancient and literal sense of being cast away in a trackless wild, was the lot of the explorer, and it well described Daniel's state of mind during his first years at Trinity. The analogy was not all that far-fetched, for Daniel had matriculated just after the Restoration, and found himself among young men of the Quality who'd spent most of their lives in Paris. Their clothing struck Daniel's eye much as the gorgeous plumage of tropical birds would a black-robed Jesuit, and their rapiers and daggers were no less fatal than the fangs and talons of jungle predators. Being a pensive chap, he had, on the very first day, begun trying to make sense of it – to get to the bottom of things, like the explorer who turns his back on orang-utans and orchids to jam his pan into the mud of a creek bed. Naught but swirling murk had been the result. In years since he has rarely gone back to those old memories. As he does now, in the tavern near Harvard College, he's startled to find that the muddy whirl has been swept away. The mental pan has been churning for fifty years, sorting the dirt and sand to the periphery and throwing it off. Most of the memories are simply gone. All that remain are a few wee nuggets. It's not plain to Daniel why these impressions have stayed, while others, which seemed as or more important to him at the time they happened, have gone away. But if the gold-panning similitude is faithful, it means that these memories matter more than the ones that have flown. For gold stays in the pan's center because of its density; it has more matter (whatever that means) in a given extent than anything else. The crowd in Charing Cross, the sword falling silently on the neck of Charles I: this is his first nugget. Then there's nothing until some months later when the Waterhouses and their old family friends the Bolstroods went on a sort of holiday in the country to demolish a cathedral. Nugget: In silhouette against a cathedral's rose window, a bent, black wraith lumbering, his two arms a pendulum, a severed marble saint's head swinging in them. This was Drake Waterhouse, Daniel's father, about sixty years old. Nugget: The stone head in flight, turning to look back in surprise at Drake. The gorgeous fabric of the window drawn inwards, like the skin on a kettle of soup when you poke a spoon through it – the glass falling away, the transcendent vision of the window converted to a disk of plain old blue-green English hillside beneath a silver sky. This was the English Civil War. Nugget: A short but stout man, having done with battering down the gilded fence that Archbishop Laud had built around the altar, dropping his sledgehammer and falling into an epileptic fit on the Lord's Table. This was Gregory Bolstrood, about fifty years old at the time. He was a preacher. He called himself an Independent. His tendency to throw fits had led to rumors that he barked like a dog during his three-hour sermons, and so the sect he'd founded, and Drake had funded, had come to be known as the Barkers. Nugget: A younger Barker smiting the cathedral's organ with an iron rod – stately pipes being felled like trees, polished boxwood keys skittering across the marble floor. This was Knott Bolstrood, the son of Gregory, in his prime. BUT THESE ARE ALL FROM his early childhood, before he'd learned to read and think. After that his young life had been well-ordered and (he's surprised to see in retrospect) interesting. Adventurous, even. Drake was a trader. After Cromwell had won and the Civil War ended, he and young Daniel traveled all over England during the 1650s buying the local produce low, then shipping it to Holland where it could be sold high. Despite much of the trade being illegal (for Drake held it as a religious conviction that the State had no business imposing on him with taxes and tariffs, and considered smuggling not just a good idea but a sacred observance), it was all orderly enough. Daniel's memories of that time – to the extent he still has any – are as prim and simple as a morality play penned by Puritans. It was not until the Restoration, and his going off to Trinity, that all became confused again, and he entered into a kind of second toddlerhood. Nugget: The night before Daniel rode up to Cambridge to begin his four-year Cram Session for the End of the World, he slept in his father's house on the outskirts of London. The bed was a rectangle of stout beams, a piece of canvas stretched across the middle by a zigzag of hairy ropes, a sack of straw tossed on, and half a dozen Dissenting preachers snoring into one another's feet. Royalty was back, England had a King, who was called Charles II, and that King had courtiers. One of them, John Comstock, had drawn up an Act of Uniformity, and the King had signed it – with one stroke of the quill making all Independent ministers into unemployed heretics. Of course they had all converged on Drake's house. Sir Roger L'Estrange, the Surveyor of the Press, came every few days and raided the place, on the suspicion that all those idle Phanatiques must be grinding out handbills in the cellar. Wilkins – who for a brief while had been Master of Trinity – had secured Daniel a place there. Daniel had phant'sied that he should be Wilkins's student, his protégé. But before Daniel could matriculate, the Restoration had forced Wilkins out. Wilkins had retired to London to serve as the minister of the Church of St. Lawrence Jewry and, in his spare time, to launch the Royal Society. It was a lesson for Daniel in just how enormously a plan could go awry. For Daniel had been living in London, and could have spent as much time as he pleased with Wilkins, and gone to all the meetings of the Royal Society, and learnt everything he might have cared to know of Natural Philosophy simply by walking across town. Instead he went up to Trinity a few months after Wilkins had left it behind forever. Nugget: On the ride up to Cambridge he passed by roadside saints whose noses and ears had been hammered off years ago by enraged Puritans. Each one of them, therefore, bore a marked resemblance to Drake. It seemed to him that each one turned its head to watch him ride past. Nugget: A wench with paint on her face, squealing as she fell backwards onto Daniel's bed at Trinity College. Daniel getting an erection. This was the Restoration. The woman's weight on his legs suddenly doubled as a boy half her age, embedded in a flouncing spray of French lace, fell on top of her. This was Upnor. Nugget: A jeweled duelling-sword clattering as its owner dropped to hands and knees and washed the floor with a bubbling fan of vomit. 'Eehhr,' he groaned, rising up to a kneeling position and letting his head loll back on his lace collar. Candle-light shone in his face: a bad portrait of the King of England. This was the Duke of Monmouth. Nugget: A sizar with a mop and a bucket, trying to clean up the room – Monmouth and Upnor and Jeffreys and all of the other fellow-commoners calling for beer, sending him scurrying down to the cellar. This was Roger Comstock. Related, distantly, to the John Comstock who'd written the Act of Uniformity. But from a branch of the family that was at odds with John's. Hence his base status at Trinity. Daniel had his own bed at Trinity, and yet he could not sleep. Sharing the great bed in Drake's house with smelly Phanatiques, or sleeping in common beds of inns while traveling round England with his father, Daniel had enjoyed great unbroken slabs of black, dreamless sleep. But when he went off to University he suddenly found himself sharing his room, and even his bed, with young men who were too drunk to stand up and too dangerous to argue with. His nights were fractured into shards. Vivid, exhausting dreams came through the cracks in between, like vapors escaping from a crazed vessel. His first coherent memory of the place begins on a night like that. College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, Cambridge 1661 The Dissenters are destitute of all decorations that can please the outward Senses, what their Teachers can hope for from humane Assistance lies altogether in their own endeavours, and they have nothing to strengthen their Doctrine with (besides what they can say for it) but probity of Manners and exemplary Lives. – The Mischiefs That Ought Justly to Be Apprehended from a Whig-Government,ANONYMOUS, attributed to BERNARD MANDEVILLE , 1714 SOME SORT OF COMMOTION in the courtyard below. Not the usual revels, or else he wouldn't have bothered to hear it. Daniel got out of bed and found himself alone in the chamber. The voices below sounded angry. He went to the window. The tail of Ursa Major was like the hand of a cœlestial clock, and Daniel had been studying how to read it. The time was probably around three in the morning. Beneath him several figures swam in murky pools of lanthorn-light. One of them was dressed as men always had been, in Daniel's experience, until very recently: a black coat and black breeches with no decorations. But the others were flounced and feathered like rare birds. The one in black seemed to be defending the door from the others. Until recently, everyone at Cambridge had looked like him, and the University had been allowed to exist only because a godly nation required divines who were fluent in Greek and Latin and Hebrew. He was barring the door because the men in lace and velvet and silk were trying to bring a wench in with them. And hardly for the first time! But this man, apparently, had seen one wench too many, and resolved to make a stand. A scarlet boy flourished in the midst of the lanthorn-light – a writhing bouquet of tassles and flounces. His arms were crossed over his body. He drew them apart with a sharp ringing noise. A rod of silver light had appeared in each of his hands – a long one in his right, a short one in his left. He drew into a crouch. His companions were all shouting; Daniel could not make out the words, but the feelings expressed were a welter of fear and joy. The black-clad fellow drew out a sword of his own, something dull and clanging, a heavier spadroon, and the scarlet boy came at him like a boiling cloud, with lightning darting out of the center. He fought as animals fight, with movements too quick for the eye to follow, and the man in black fought as men fight, with hesitations and second thoughts. He had a great many holes in him very soon, and was reduced to a heap of somber, bloody clothing on the green grass of the courtyard, shifting and rocking, trying to find a position that was not excruciatingly painful. All of the Cavaliers ran away. The Duke of Monmouth picked the wench up over his shoulder like a sack of grain and carried her off at a dead run. The scarlet boy tarried long enough to plant a boot on the dying man's shoulder, turn him over onto his back, and spit something into his face. All round the courtyard, shutters began to slam closed. Daniel threw a coat over himself, pulled on a pair of boots, got a lanthorn of his own lit, and hurried downstairs. But it was too late for hurrying – the body was already gone. The blood looked like tar on the grass. Daniel followed one dribble to the next, across the green, out the back of the college, and onto the Backs – the boggy floodplain of the river Cam, which wandered around in back of the University. The wind had come up a bit, making noise in the trees that nearly obscured the splash. A less eager witness than Daniel could have claimed he'd heard nothing, and it would have been no lie. He stopped then, because his mind had finally come awake, and he was afraid. He was out in the middle of an empty fen, following a dead man toward a dark river, and the wind was trying to blow out his lanthorn. A pair of naked men appeared in the light, and Daniel screamed. One of the men was tall, and had the most beautiful eyes Daniel had ever seen in a man's face; they were like the eyes of a painting of the Pieta that Drake had once flung onto a bonfire. He looked towards Daniel as if to say, Who dares scream? The other man was shorter, and he reacted by cringing. Daniel finally recognized him as Roger Comstock, the sizar. 'Who's that?' this one asked. 'My lord?' he guessed. 'No man's lord,' Daniel said. 'It is I. Daniel Waterhouse.' 'It's Comstock and Jeffreys. What are you doing out here in the middle of the night?' Both of the men were naked and soaked, their long hair draggling and seeping on their shoulders. Yet even Comstock seemed at ease compared to Daniel, who was dry, clothed, and equipped with a lanthorn. 'I might ask the same of you. Where are your clothes?' Jeffreys now stepped forward. Comstock knew to shut up. 'We doffed our clothing when we swam the river,' Jeffreys said, as if this should be perfectly obvious. Comstock saw the hole in that story as quickly as Daniel did, and hastily plugged it: 'When we emerged, we found that we had drifted for some distance downstream, and were unable to find them again in the darkness.' 'Why did you swim the river?' 'We were in hot pursuit of that ruffian.' “Ruffian!?' The outburst caused a narrowing of the beautiful eyes. A look of mild disgust appeared on Jeffreys's face. But Roger Comstock was not above continuing with the conversation: 'Yes! Some Phanatique – a Puritan, or possibly a Barker – he challenged my Lord Upnor in the courtyard just now! You must not have seen it.' 'I did see it.' 'Ah.' Jeffreys turned sideways, caught his dripping penis between two fingers, and urinated tremendously onto the ground. He was staring toward the College. 'The window of your and My Lord Monmouth's chamber is awkwardly located – you must have leaned out of it?' 'Perhaps I leaned out a bit.' 'Otherwise, how could you have seen the men duelling?' 'Would you call it duelling, or murdering?' Once again, Jeffreys appeared to be overcome with queasiness at the fact that he was having a conversation of any sort with the likes of Daniel. Comstock put on a convincing display of mock astonishment. 'Are you claiming to have witnessed a murder?' Daniel was too taken aback to answer. Jeffreys continued to jet urine onto the ground; he had produced a great steaming patch of it already, as if he intended to cover his nakedness with a cloud. He furrowed his brow and asked, 'Murder, you say. So a man has died?' 'I . . . I should suppose so,' Daniel stammered. 'Hmmm. . . . supposing is a dangerous practice, when you are supposing that an Earl has committed a capital crime. Perhaps you'd better show the dead body to the Justice of the Peace, and allow the coroner to establish a cause of death.' 'The body is gone.' 'You say body.Wouldn't it be correct to say, wounded man ?' 'Well . . . I did not personally verify that the heart had stopped, if that is what you mean.' 'Wounded man would be the correct term, then. To me, he seemed very much a wounded man, and not a dead one, when Comstock and I were pursuing him across the Backs.' 'Unquestionably not dead,' Comstock agreed. 'But I saw him lying there – ' 'From your window?' Jeffreys asked, finally done pissing. 'Yes.' 'But you are not looking out your window now, are you, Waterhouse?' 'Obviously not.' 'Thank you for telling me what is obvious. Did you leap out of your window, or did you walk down stairs?' 'Down stairs, of course!' 'Can you see the courtyard from the staircase?' 'No.' 'So as you descended the stairs, you lost sight of the wounded man.' 'Naturally.' 'You really haven't the faintest idea, do you, Waterhouse, of what happened in the courtyard during the interval when you were coming down stairs?' 'No, but – ' 'And despite this ignorance – ignorance utter, black, and entire – you presume to accuse an Earl, and personal friend of the King, of having committed – what was it again?' 'I believe he said murder, sir,' Comstock put in helpfully. 'Very well. Let us go and wake up the Justice of the Peace,' Jeffreys said. On his way past Waterhouse he snatched the lanthorn, and then began marching back towards the College. Comstock followed him, giggling. First Jeffreys had to get himself dried off, and to summon his own sizar to dress his hair and get his clothes on – a gentleman could not go and visit the Justice of the Peace in a disheveled state. Meanwhile Daniel had to sit in his chamber with Comstock, who bustled about and cleaned the place with more diligence than he had ever shown before. Since Daniel was not in a talkative mood, Roger Comstock filled in the silences. 'Louis Anglesey, Earl of Upnor – pushes a sword like a demon, doesn't he? You'd never guess he's only fourteen! It's because he and Monmouth and all that lot spent the Interregnum in Paris, taking their pushing-lessons at the Academy of Monsieur du Plessis, near the Palais Cardinal. They learned a very French conception of honor there, and haven't quite adjusted to England yet – they'll challenge a man to a duel at the slightest offence – real or phant'sied. Oh, now, don't look so stricken, Mr. Waterhouse – remember that if that fellow he was duelling with is found, and is found to be dead, and his injuries found to be the cause of his death, and those injuries are found to've been inflicted by My Lord Upnor, and not in a duel per se but in an unprovoked assault, and if a jury can be persuaded to overlook the faults in your account – in a word, if he is successfully prosecuted for this hypothetical murder – then you won't have to worry about it! After all, if he's guilty, then he can't very well claim you've dishonored him with the accusation, can he? Nice and tidy, Mr. Waterhouse. Some of his friends might be quite angry with you, I'll admit – oh, no, Mr. Waterhouse, I didn't mean it in the way you think. I am not your enemy – remember, I am of the Golden, not the Silver, Comstocks.' It was not the first time he'd said something like this. Daniel knew that the Comstocks were a grotesquely large and complicated family, who had begun popping up in minor roles as far back as the reign of King Richard Lionheart, and he gathered that this Silver/Golden dichotomy was some kind of feud between different branches of the clan. Roger Comstock wanted to impress on Daniel that he had nothing in common, other than a name, with John Comstock: the aging gunpowder magnate and arch-Royalist, and now Lord Chancellor, who had been the author of the recent Declaration of Uniformity – the act that had filled Drake's house with jobless Ranters, Barkers, Quakers, et cetera.'Your people,' Daniel said, 'the Golden Comstocks, as you dub them – pray, what are they?' 'I beg your pardon?' 'High Church?' Meaning Anglicans of the Archbishop Laud school, who according to Drake and his ilk were really no different from Papists – and Drake believed that the Pope was literally the Antichrist. 'Low Church?' Meaning Anglicans of a more Calvinist bent, nationalistic, suspicious of priests in fancy clothes. 'Independents?' Meaning ones who'd severed all ties with the Established Church, and made up their own churches as it suited them. Daniel did not venture any further down the continuum, for he had already shot well beyond Roger Comstock's limits as a theologian. Roger threw up his hands and said merely, 'Because of the unpleasantness with the Silver branch, recent generations of the Golden Comstocks have spent rather a lot of time in the Dutch Republic.' To Daniel, the Dutch Republic meant God-fearing places like Leiden, where the pilgrims had sojourned before going to Massachusetts. But it presently came clear that Roger was talking about Amsterdam. 'There are all sorts of churches in Amsterdam. Cheek by jowl. Strange as it must sound, this habit has quite worn off on us over the years.' 'Meaning what? That you've become used to preserving your faith despite being surrounded by heretics?' 'No. Rather, it's as if I've got an Amsterdam inside of my head.' 'A what !?' 'Many different sects and faiths that are always arguing with one another. A Babel of religious disputation that never dies down. I have got used to it.' 'You believe nothing !?' Further debate – if listening to Roger's ramblings could be considered such – was cut off by the arrival of Monmouth, who strolled in looking offensively relaxed. Roger Comstock had to make a fuss over him for a while – jacking his boots off, letting his hair down, getting him undressed. Comstock supplied entertainment by telling the tale of chasing the killer Puritan across the Backs and into the River Cam. The more the Duke heard of this story, the more he liked it, and the more he loved Roger Comstock. And yet Comstock made so many ingratiating references to Waterhouse that Daniel began to feel that he was still part of the same merry crew; and Monmouth even directed one or two kindly winks at him. Finally Jeffreys arrived in a freshly blocked wig, fur-lined cape, purple silk doublet, and fringed breeches, a ruby-handled rapier dangling alongside one leg, and fantastical boots turned down at the tops so far that they nearly brushed the ground. Looking, therefore, twice as old and ten times as rich as Daniel, even though he was a year younger and probably broke. He led the faltering Daniel and the implacably cheerful Comstock down the staircase – pausing there for a while to reflect upon the total impossibility of anyone's seeing the courtyard from it – and across Trinity's great lawn and out the gate into the streets of Cambridge, where water-filled wheel-ruts, reflecting the light of dawn, looked like torpid, fluorescent snakes. In a few minutes they reached the house of the Justice of the Peace, and were informed that he was at church. Jeffreys therefore led them to an alehouse, where he was soon engulfed in wenches. He caused drink and food to be brought out. Daniel sat and watched him tear into a great bloody haunch of beef whilst downing two pints of ale and four small glasses of the Irish drink known as Usquebaugh. None of it had any effect on Jeffreys; he was one of those who could become staggeringly drunk and yet only wax quieter and calmer. The wenches kept Jeffreys occupied. Daniel sat and knew fear – not the abstract fear that he dutifully claimed to feel when preachers spoke of hellfire, but a genuine physical sensation, a taste in his mouth, a sense that at any moment, from any direction, a blade of French steel might invade his vitals and inaugurate a slow process of bleeding or festering to death. Why else would Jeffreys have led him to this den? It was a perfect place to get murdered. The only way to get his mind off it was to talk to Roger Comstock, who continued with strenuous but completely pointless efforts to ingratiate himself. He circled round one more time to the topic of John Comstock, with whom – it could not be said too many times – he had nothing in common. That he had it on good authority that the gunpowder turned out by Comstock's mills was full of sand, and that it either failed entirely to explode, or else caused cannons to burst. Why everyone, save a few self-deluding Puritans, now understood that the defeat of the first King Charles had occurred not because Cromwell was such a great general, but because of the faulty powder that Comstock had supplied to the Cavaliers. Daniel – scared to death – was in no position to understand the genealogical distinctions between the so-called Silver and Golden Comstocks. The upshot was that Roger Comstock seemed, in some way, to want to be his friend, and was trying desperately hard to be just that, and indeed was the finest fellow that a fellow could possibly be, while still having spent the night dumping the corpse of a murder victim into a river. The ringing of church-bells told them that the Justice of the Peace was probably finished with his breakfast of bread and wine. But Jeffreys, having made himself comfortable here, was in no hurry to leave. From time to time he would catch Daniel's eye and stare at him, daring Daniel to stand up and head for the door. But Daniel was in no hurry, either. His mind was seeking an excuse for doing nothing. The one that he settled on went something like this: Upnor would be Judged – for good – five years from now when Jesus came back. What was the point of having the secular authorities sit in judgment on him now? If England were still a holy nation, as it had been until recently, then prosecuting Louis Anglesey, Earl of Upnor, would have been a fitting exercise of her authority. But the King was back, England was Babylon, Daniel Waterhouse and the hapless Puritan who'd died last night were strangers in a strange land, like early Christians in pagan Rome, and Daniel would only dirty his hands by getting into some endless legal broil. Best to rise above the fray and keep his eye on the year sixteen hundred and sixty-six. So it was back to the College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity without saying a word to the Justice of the Peace. It had begun to rain. When Daniel reached the college, the grass had been washed clean. THE DEAD MAN'S BODY was found two days later, tangled in some rushes half a mile down the Cam. He was a Fellow of Trinity College, a scholar of Hebrew and Aramaic who had been slightly acquainted with Drake. His friends went round making inquiries, but no one had seen a thing. There was a rowdy funeral service in a primitive church that had been established in a barn five miles from Cambridge. Exactly five miles. For the Act of Uniformity stated, among other things, that Independents could not gather churches within five miles of any Established (i.e., Anglican) parish church, and so a lot of Puritans had been busy with compasses and maps lately, and a lot of bleak real estate had changed hands. Drake came up, and brought with him Daniel's older half-brothers, Raleigh and Sterling. Hymns were sung and homilies delivered, affirming that the victim had gone on to his eternal reward. Daniel prayed, rather loudly, to be delivered from the seething den of reptiles that was Trinity College. Then, of course, he had to suffer advice from his elders. First, Drake took him aside. Drake had long ago adjusted to the loss of his nose and ears, but all he had to do was turn his face in Daniel's direction to remind him that what he was going through at Trinity wasn't so bad. So Daniel hardly took in a single word of what Drake said to him. But he gathered that it was something along the lines of that coming into one's chambers every night to find a different whore, services already paid for, slumbering in one's bed, constituted a severe temptation for a young man, and that Drake was all in favor of it – seeing it as a way to hold said young man's feet to the eternal fire and find out what he was made of. Implicit in all of this was that Daniel would pass the test. He could not bring himself to tell his father that he'd already failed it. Second, Raleigh and Sterling took Daniel to an extremely rural alehouse on the way back into town and told him that he must be some kind of half-wit, not to mention an ingrate, if he was not in a state of bliss. Drake and his first clutch of sons had made a very large amount of money despite (come to think of it, because of ) religious persecution. Among that ilk, the entire point of going to Cambridge was to rub elbows with the fine and the mighty. The family had sent Daniel there, at great expense (as they never tired of reminding him), and if Daniel occasionally woke up to find the Duke of Monmouth passed out on top of him, it only meant that all of their dreams had come true. Implicit was that Raleigh and Sterling did not believe that the world was coming to an end in 1666. If true, this meant that Daniel's excuse for not ratting on Upnor was void. The whole incident was then apparently forgotten by everyone at Trinity except Waterhouse and Jeffreys. Jeffreys ignored Daniel for the most part, but from time to time he would, for example, sit across from him and stare at him all through dinner, then pursue him across the lawn afterwards: 'I can't stop looking at you. You are fascinating, Mr. Waterhouse, a living and walking incarnation of cravenness. You saw a man murdered, and you did nothing about it. Your face glows like a hot branding-iron. I want to brand it into my memory so that as I grow old, I may look back upon it as a sort of Platonic ideal of cowardice. 'I'm going into law, you know. Were you aware that the emblem of justice is a scale? From a beam depend two pans. On one, what is being weighed – the accused party. On the other, a standard weight, a polished gold cylinder stamped with the assayer's mark. You, Mr. Waterhouse, shall be the standard against which I will weigh all guilty cowards. 'What sort of Puritanical sophistry did you gin up, Mr. Waterhouse, to justify your inaction? Others like you got on a ship and sailed to Massachusetts so that they could be apart from us sinners, and live a pure life. I ween you are of the same mind, Mr. Waterhouse, but sailing on a ship across the North Atlantic is not for cowards, and so you are here. I think that you have withdrawn into a sort of Massachusetts of the mind! Your body's here at Trinity, but your spirit has flown off to some sort of notional Plymouth Rock – when we sit at High Table, you phant'sy yourself in a wigwam ripping drumsticks from a turkey and chewing on Indian corn and making eyes at some redskinned Indian lass.' THIS SORT OF THING LED to Daniel's spending much time going for walks in Cambridge's gardens and greens, where, if he chose his route carefully, he could stroll for a quarter of an hour without having to step over the body of an unconscious young scholar, or (in warmer weather) make apologies for having stumbled upon Monmouth, or one of his courtiers, copulating with a prostitute al fresco.More than once, he noticed another solitary young man strolling around the Backs. Daniel knew nothing of him – he had made no impression upon the College whatsoever. But once Daniel got in the habit of looking for him, he began to notice him here and there, skulking around the edges of University life. The boy was a sizar – a nobody from the provinces trying to escape from the lower class by taking holy orders and angling for a deaconage in some gale-chafed parish. He and the other sizars (such as Roger Comstock) could be seen descending on the dining-hall after the upper classes – pensioners (e.g., Daniel) and fellow-commoners (e.g., Monmouth and Upnor) – had departed, to forage among their scraps and clean up their mess. Like a pair of comets drawn together, across a desolate void, by some mysterious action at a distance, they attracted each other across the greens and fells of Cambridge. Both were shy, and so early they would simply fall into parallel trajectories during their long strolls. But in time the lines converged. Isaac was pale as star-light, and so frail-looking that no one would've guessed he'd live as long as he had. His hair was exceptionally fair and already streaked with silver. He already had protruding pale eyes and a sharp nose. There was the sense of much going on inside his head, which he had not the slightest inclination to share with anyone else. But like Daniel, he was an alienated Puritan with a secret interest in natural philosophy, so naturally they fell in together. They arranged a room swap. Another merchant's son eagerly took Daniel's place, viewing it as a move up the world's ladder. The College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity did not segregate the classes as rigidly as other colleges, so it was permitted for Isaac and Daniel to chum together. They shared a tiny room with a window looking out over the town – for Daniel, a great improvement over the courtyard view, so fraught with bloody memories. Musket-balls had been fired in through their window during the Civil War, and the bullet-holes were still in the ceiling. Daniel learned that Isaac came from a family prosperous by Lincolnshire standards. His father had died before Newton was even born, leaving behind a middling yeoman's legacy. His mother had soon married a more or less affluent cleric. She did not sound, from Isaac's description, like a doting mum. She'd packed him off to school in a town called Grantham. Between her inheritance from the first marriage and what she'd acquired from the second, she easily could have sent him to Cambridge as a pensioner. But out of miserliness, or spite, or some hostility toward education in general, she'd sent him as a sizar instead – meaning that Isaac was obliged to serve as some other student's boot-polisher and table-waiter. Isaac's dear mother, unable to humiliate her son from a distance, had arranged it so that some other student – it didn't matter which – would do it in her stead. In combination with that Newton was obviously far more brilliant than Daniel was, Daniel was uneasy with the arrangement. Daniel proposed that they make common cause, and pool what they had, and live together as equals. To Daniel's surprise, Isaac did not accept. He continued to perform sizar's work, without complaint. By any measure, his life was much better now. They'd spend hours, days, in that chamber together, spending candles by the pound and ink by the quart, working their separate ways through Aristotle. It was the life that both of them had longed for. Even so, Daniel thought it strange that Isaac would help him in the mornings with his clothing, and devote a quarter of an hour, or more, to dressing his hair. Half a century later, Daniel could remember, without vanity, that he had been a handsome enough young man. His hair was thick and long, and Isaac learned that if he combed it in a particular way he could bring out a certain natural wave, up above Daniel's forehead. He would not rest, every morning, until he had accomplished this. Daniel went along with it uneasily. Even then, Isaac had the air of a man who could be dangerous when offended, and Daniel sensed that if he declined, Isaac would not take it well. So it went until one Whitsunday, when Daniel awoke to find Isaac gone. Daniel had gone to sleep well after midnight, Isaac as usual had stayed up later. The candles were all burned down to stubs. Daniel guessed Isaac was out emptying the chamber-pot, but he didn't come back. Daniel went over to their little work-table to look for evidence, and found a sheet of paper on which Isaac had drawn a remarkably fine portrait of a sleeping youth. An angelic beauty. Daniel could not tell whether it was meant to be a boy or a girl. But carrying it to the window and looking at it in day-light, he noticed, above the youth's brow, a detail in the hair. It served as the cryptological key that unlocked the message. Suddenly he recognized himself in that page. Not as he really was, but purified, beautified, perfected, as though by some alchemical refinement – the slag and dross raked away, the radiant spirit allowed to shine forth, like the Philosophick Mercury. It was a drawing of Daniel Waterhouse as he might have looked if he had gone to the Justice of the Peace and accused Upnor and been persecuted and suffered a Christlike death. Daniel went down and eventually found Isaac bent and kneeling in the chapel, wracked with agony, praying desperately for the salvation of his immortal soul. Daniel could not but sympathize, though he knew too little of sin and too little of Isaac to guess what his friend might be repenting for. Daniel sat nearby and did a little praying of his own. In time, the pain and fear seemed to ebb away. The chapel filled up. A service was begun. They took out the Books of Common Prayer and turned to the page for Whitsunday. The priest intoned: 'What is required of them who come to the Lord's Supper?' They answered, 'To examine themselves whether they repent of their former sins, steadfastly purporting to lead a new life.' Daniel watched Isaac's face as he spoke this catechism and saw in it the same fervor that always lit up Drake's mangled countenance when he really thought he was on to something. Both of them took communion. This is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world . Daniel watched Isaac change from a tortured wretch, literally writhing in spiritual pain, into a holy and purified saint. Having repented of their former sins – steadfastly purporting to lead new lives – they went back up to their chamber. Isaac pitched that drawing into the fire, opened up his note-book, and began to write. At the head of a blank page he wrote Sins committed before Whitsunday 1662 and then began writing out a list of every bad thing he'd ever done that he could remember, all the way back to his childhood: wishing that his stepfather was dead, beating up some boy at school, and so forth. He wrote all day and into the night. When he had exhausted himself he started up a new page entitled Since Whitsunday 1662 and left it, for the time being, blank. Meanwhile, Daniel turned back to his Euclid. Jeffreys kept reminding him that he had failed at being a holy man. Jeffreys did this because he supposed it was a way of torturing Daniel the Puritan. In fact, Daniel had never wanted to be a preacher anyway, save insofar as he wanted to please his father. Ever since his meeting with Wilkins, he had wanted only to be a Natural Philosopher. Failing the moral test had freed him to be that, at a heavy price in self-loathing. If Natural Philosophy led him to eternal damnation, there was nothing he could do about it anyway, as Drake the predestinationist would be the first to affirm. An interval of years or even decades might separate Whitsunday 1662 and Daniel's arrival at the gates of Hell. He reckoned he might as well fill that time with something he at least found interesting. A month later, when Isaac was out of the room, Daniel opened up the note-book and turned to the page headed Since Whitsunday 1662.It was still blank. He checked it again two months later. Nothing. At the time he assumed that Isaac had simply forgotten about it. Or perhaps he had stopped sinning! Years later, Daniel understood that neither guess was true. Isaac Newton had stopped believing himself capable of sin. This was a harsh judgment to pass on anyone – and the proverb went Judge not lest ye be judged. But its converse was that when you were treating with a man like Isaac Newton, the rashest and cruelest judge who ever lived, you must be sure and swift in your own judgments. Boston, Massachusetts Bay Colony OCTOBER 12, 1713 Others apart sat on a Hill retir'd, In thoughts more elevate, and reason'd high Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate – MILTON, Paradise Lost LIKE A GOOD CARTESIAN who measures everything against a fixed point, Daniel Waterhouse thinks about whether or not to go back to England while keeping one eye, through a half-closed door, on his son: Godfrey William, the fixed stake that Daniel has driven into the ground after many decades' wanderings. At an arbitrary place on a featureless plain, some would argue, but now the Origin of all his considerations. Sir Isaac would have it that all matter is a sort of permanent ongoing miracle, that planets are held in their orbits, and atoms in their places, by the immanent will of God, and looking at his own son, Daniel can hardly bear to think otherwise. The boy's a coiled spring, the potential for generations of American Waterhouses, though it's just as likely he'll catch a fever and die tomorrow. In most other Boston houses, a slave woman would be looking after the boy, leaving the parents free to discourse with their visitor. Daniel Waterhouse does not own slaves. The reasons are several. Some of them are even altruistic. So little Godfrey sits on the lap, not of some Angolan negress, but of their neighbor: the daft but harmless Mrs. Goose, who comes into their home occasionally to do the one thing that she apparently can do: to entertain children by spouting all manner of nonsensical stories and doggerel that she has collected or invented. Meanwhile Enoch is off trying to make arrangements with Captain van Hoek of the Minerva. This has freed Daniel and Faith and the young Rev. Wait Still Waterhouse*to discuss what is the best way to respond to the startling invitation from Princess Caroline of Ansbach. Many words are said, but they make no more impact on Daniel than Mrs. Goose's incoherent narratives about cutlery leaping over cœlestial bodies and sluttish hags living in discarded footwear. Wait Still Waterhouse says something like, 'You're sixty-seven, it's true, but you have your health – many have lived much longer.' 'If you avoid large crowds, sleep well, nourish yourself – ' Faith says. 'Lon-don Bridge is fal-ling down, fal-ling down, fal-ling down . . . ,' sings Mrs. Goose. 'My mind has never felt quite so much like an arrangement of cranks and gears,' Daniel says. 'I decided what I was going to do quite some time ago.' 'But people have been known to change their minds – ' says the reverend. 'Am I to infer, from what you just said, that you are a Free Will man?' Daniel inquires. 'I really am shocked to find that in a Waterhouse. What are they teaching at Harvard these days? Don't you realize that this Colony was founded by people fleeing from those who backed the concept of Free Will?' 'I don't fancy that the Free Will question really had very much to do with the founding of this Colony. It was more a rebellion against the entire notion of an Established church – be it Papist or Anglican. It is true that many of those Independents – such as our ancestor John Waterhouse – got their doctrine from the Calvinists in Geneva, and scorned the notion, so cherished by the Papists and the Anglicans, of Free Will. But this alone would not have sufficed to send them into exile.' 'I get it not from Calvin but from Natural Philosophy,' Daniel says. 'The mind is a machine, a Logic Mill. That's what I believe.' 'Like the one you have been building across the river?' 'A good deal more effective than that one, fortunately.' 'You think that if you made yours better, it could do what the human mind does? That it could have a soul?' 'When you speak of a soul, you phant'sy something above and beyond the cranks and gears, the dead matter, of which the machine – be it a Logic Mill or a brain – is constructed. I do not believe in this.' 'Why not?' Like many simple questions, this one is difficult for Daniel to answer. 'Why not? I suppose because it puts me in mind of Alchemy. This soul, this extra thing added to the brain, reminds me of the Quintessence that the Alchemists are forever seeking: a mysterious supernatural presence that is supposed to suffuse the world. But they can never seem to find any. Sir Isaac Newton has devoted his life to the project and has nothing to show for it.' 'If your sympathies do not run in that direction, then I know better than to change your mind, at least where Free Will versus Predestination is concerned,' says Wait Still. 'But I know that when you were a boy you had the privilege of sitting at the knee of men such as John Wilkins, Gregory Bolstrood, Drake Waterhouse, and many others of Independent sympathies – men who preached freedom of conscience. Who advocated Gathered, as opposed to Established, churches. The flourishing of small congregations. Abolition of central dogma.' Daniel, still not quite believing it: 'Yes . . .' Wait Still, brightly: 'So what's to stop me from preaching Free Will to my flock?' Daniel laughs. 'And, as you are not merely glib, but young, handsome, and personable, converting many to the same creed – including, I take it, my own wife?' Faith blushes, then stands up and turns around to hide it. In the candle-light, a bit of silver glints in her hair: a hair-pin shaped like a caduceus. She has gotten up on the pretext of going to check on little Godfrey, even though Mrs. Goose has him well in hand. In a small town like Boston, you'd think it would be impossible to have a conversation about anything without being eavesdropped on. Indeed, the whole place was set up to make it so – they deliver the mail, not to your house, but to the nearest tavern, and if you don't come round and pick it up after a few days the publican will open it up and read it aloud to whomever is in attendance. So Daniel had assumed that Mrs. Goose would be listening in on the whole conversation. But instead she is completely absorbed in her work, as if telling yarns to a boy were more important than this great Decision that Daniel is wrestling with, here at damn near the end of his long life. 'It's quite all right, my dear,' Daniel says to the back of Faith's bodice. 'Having been raised by a man who believed in Predestination, I'd much rather that my boy was raised by a Free Will woman.' But Faith leaves the room. Wait Still says, 'So . . . you believe God has predestined you to sail for England tonight?' 'No – I'm not a Calvinist. Now, you're baffled, Reverend, because you spent too much time at Harvard reading old books about the likes of Calvin and Archbishop Laud, and are still caught up in the disputes of Arminians versus Puritans.' 'What should I have been reading, Doctor?' said Wait Still, making a bit too much of a show of flexibility. 'Galileo, Descartes, Huygens, Newton, Leibniz.' 'The syllabus of your Institute of Technologickal Arts?' 'Yes.' 'Didn't know that you touched on matters of theology.' 'That was a bit of a jab – no, no, quite all right! I rather liked it. I'm pleased by the display of backbone. I can see clearly enough that you'll end up raising my son.' Daniel means this in a completely non-sexual way – he had in mind that Wait Still would act in some avuncular role – but from the blush on Wait Still's face he can see that the role of stepfather is more likely. This, then, would be a good time to change the subject to abstract technical matters: 'It all comes from first principles. Everything can be measured. Everything acts according to physical laws. Our minds included. My mind, that's doing the deciding, is already set in its course, like a ball rolling down a trough.' 'Uncle! Surely you are not denying the existence of souls – of a Supreme Soul.' Daniel says nothing to this. 'Neither Newton nor Leibniz would agree with you,' Wait Still continues. 'They're afraid to agree with me, because they are important men, and they would be destroyed if they came out and said it. But no one will bother to destroy me .' 'Can we not influence your mental machine by arguments?' asks Faith, who has returned to stand in the doorway. Daniel wants to say that Wait Still's best arguments would be about as influential as boogers flicked against the planking of a Ship of the Line in full sail, but sees no reason to be acrimonious – the whole point of the exercise is to be remembered well by those who'll stay in the New World, on the theory that as the sun rises on the eastern fringe of America, small things cast long shadows westwards. 'The future is as set as the past,' he says, 'and the future is that I'll climb on board the Minerva within the hour. You can argue that I should stay in Boston to raise my son. Of course, I should like nothing better. I should, God willing, have the satisfaction of watching him grow up for as many years as I have left. Godfrey would have a flesh-and-blood father with many conspicuous weaknesses and failings. He'd hold me in awe for a short while, as all boys do their fathers. It would not last. But if I sail away on Minerva, then in place of a flesh-and-blood Dad – a fixed, known quantity – he'll have a phant'sy of one, infinitely ductile in his mind. I can go away and imagine generations of Waterhouses yet unborn, and Godfrey can imagine a hero-father better than I can really be.' Wait Still Waterhouse, an intelligent and decent man, can see so many holes in this argument that he is paralyzed by choices. Faith, a better mother than wife, who has a better son than a husband, encompasses a vast sweep of compromises with a pert nod of the head. Daniel gathers up his son from Mrs. Goose's lap – Enoch calls in a hired coach – they go to the waterfront. So I saw in my dream that the man began to run. Now he had not run far from his own door, but his wife and children perceiving it began to cry after him to return: but the man put his fingers in his ears, and ran on crying, 'Life, life, eternal life.' So he looked not behind him, but fled towards the middle of the plain. – JOHN BUNYAN, The Pilgrim's Progress MINERVA HAS ALREADY WEIGHED anchor, using the high tide to widen the distance between her keel and certain obstructions near the Harbor's entrance. Daniel is to be rowed out to join her in a pilot's boat. Godfrey, who is half asleep, kisses his old Dad dutifully and watches his departure like a dream – that's good, as he can tailor the memory later to suit his changing demands – like a suit of clothes modified every six months to fit a growing frame. Wait Still stands by Faith's side, and Daniel can't help thinking they make a lovely couple. Enoch, that home-wrecker, remains on the end of the wharf, guiltily apart, his silver hair glowing like white fire in the full moon-light. A dozen slaves pull mightily at the oars, forcing Daniel to sit down, lest the boat shoot out from under his feet and leave him floundering in the Harbor. Actually he does not sit as much as sprawl and get lucky. From shore it probably looks like a pratfall, but he knows that this ungainly moment will be edited from The Story that will one day live in the memories of the American Waterhouses. The Story is in excellent hands. Mrs. Goose has come along to watch and memorize, and she has a creepy knack for that kind of thing, and Enoch is staying, too, partly to look after the physical residue of the Massachusetts Bay Colony Institute of Technologickal Arts, but also partly to look after The Story and see that it's shaped and told to Daniel's advantage. Daniel weeps. The sounds of his sniffling and heaving drown out nearly everything else, but he becomes aware of some low, strange music: the slaves have begun to sing. A rowing-song? No, that would have a lumbering, yo-ho-ho sort of rhythm, and this is much more complicated, with beats in the wrong places. It must be an Africk tune, because they have meddled with some of the notes, made them flatter than they should be. And yet it's weirdly Irish at the same time. There is no shortage of Irish slaves in the West Indies, where these men first fell under the whip, so that might explain it. It is (musicological speculations aside) an entirely sad song, and Daniel knows why: by climbing aboard this boat and breaking down in sobs, he has reminded each one of these Africans of the day when he was taken, in chains, off the coast of Guinea, and loaded aboard a tall ship. Within a few minutes they are out of view of the Boston wharves, but still surrounded by land: the many islets, rocks, and bony tentacles of Boston Harbor. Their progress is watched by dead men hanging in rusty gibbets. When pirates are put to death, it is because they have been out on the high seas violating Admiralty law, whose jurisdiction extends only to the high-tide mark. The implacable logic of the Law dictates that pirate-gallows must, therefore, be erected in the intertidal zone, and that pirate-corpses must be washed three times by the tide before they are cut down. Of course mere death is too good for pirates, and so the sentence normally calls for their corpses to be gibbeted in locked iron cages so that they can never be cut down and given a Christian burial. New England seems to have at least as many pirates as honest seamen. But here, as in so many other matters, Providence has smiled upon Massachusetts, for Boston Harbor is choked with small islands that are washed by high tides, providing vast resources of pirate-hanging and -gibbeting real estate. Nearly all of it has been put to use. During the daytime, the gibbets are obscured by clouds of hungry birds. But it's the middle of the night, the birds are in Boston and Charlestown, slumbering in their nests of plaited pirate-hair. The tide is high, the tops of the reefs submerged, the supports rising directly out of the waves. And so as the singing slaves row Daniel out on what he assumes will be his last voyage, scores of dessicated and skeletonized pirates, suspended in midair above the moonlit sea, watch him go by, as a ceremonial honor-guard. It takes better than an hour to catch Minerva, just clearing the Spectacle Island shallows. Her hull is barrel-shaped and curves out above them. A pilot's ladder is deployed. The ascent isn't easy. Universal gravitation is not his only opponent. Rising waves, sneaking in from the North Atlantic, bounce him off the hull. Infuriatingly, the climb brings back all manner of Puritanical dogma he's done his best to forget – the ladder becomes Jacob's, the boat of sweaty black slaves Earth, the Ship Heaven, the sailors in the moonlit rigging Angels, the captain none other than Drake himself, ascended these many years, exhorting him to climb faster. Daniel leaves America, becoming part of that country's stock of memories – the composted manure from which it's sending out fresh green shoots. The Old World reaches down to draw him in: a couple of lascars, their flesh and breath suffused with saffron, asafœtida, and cardamom, lean over the rail, snare his cold pale hands in their warm black ones, and haul him in like a fish. A roller slides under the hull at the same moment – they fall back to the deck in an orgiastic tangle. The lascars spring up and busy themselves drawing up his equipage on ropes. Compared to the little boat with the creaking and splashing of its oars and the grunting of the slaves, Minerva moves with the silence of a well-trimmed ship, signifying (or so he hopes) her harmony with the forces and fields of nature. Those Atlantic rollers make the deck beneath him accelerate gently up and down, effortlessly moving his body – it's like lying on a mother's bosom as she breathes. So Daniel lies there spreadeagled for a while, staring up at the stars – white geometric points on a slate, gridded by shadows of rigging, an explanatory network of catenary curves and Euclidean sections, like one of those geometric proofs out of Newton's Principia Mathematica. College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, Cambridge 1663 An Ideot may be taught by Custom to Write and Read, yet no Man can be taught Genius. – Memoirs of the Right Villanous John Hall, 1708 DANIEL HAD GONE OUT for a time in the evening, and met with Roger Comstock at a tavern, and witnessed to him, and tried to bring him to Jesus. This had failed. Daniel returned to his chamber to find the cat up on the table with its face planted in Isaac's dinner. Isaac was seated a few inches away. He had shoved a darning-needle several inches into his eyeball. Daniel screamed from deep down in his gut. The cat, morbidly obese from eating virtually all of Isaac's meals, fell off the table like a four-legged haggis, and trudged away. Isaac did not flinch, which was probably a good thing. Daniel's scream had no other effects on business as usual at Trinity College – those who weren't too impaired to hear it probably assumed it was a wench playing hard-to-get. 'In my dissections of animals' eyes at Grantham, I often marveled at their perfect sphericity, which, in bodies that were otherwise irregular grab-bags of bones, tubes, skeins and guts, seemed to mark them out as apart from all the other organs. As if the Creator had made those orbs in the very image of the heavenly spheres, signifying that one should receive light from the other,' Isaac mused aloud. 'Naturally, I wondered whether an eye that was not spherical would work as well. There are practical as well as theologic reasons for spherical eyes: one, so that they can swivel in their sockets.' There was some tension in his voice – the discomfort must have been appalling. Tears streamed down and spattered on the table like the exhaust from a water-clock – the only time Daniel ever saw Isaac weep. 'Another practical reason is simply that the eyeball is pressurized from within by the aqueous humour.' 'My God, you're not bleeding the humour from your eyeball – ?' 'Look more carefully!' Isaac snapped. 'Observe – don't imagine.' 'I can't bear it.' 'The needle is not piercing anything – the orb is perfectly intact. Come and see!' Daniel approached, one hand clamped over his mouth as if he were abducting himself – he did not want to vomit on the open Waste-Book where Isaac was taking notes with his free hand. Upon a closer look he saw that Isaac had inserted the darning-needle not into the eyeball itself but into the lubricated bearing where the orb rotated in its socket – he must've simply pulled his lower eyelid way down and probed between it and the eyeball until he'd found a way in. 'The needle is blunt – it is perfectly harmless,' Isaac grunted. 'If I could trouble you for a few minutes' assistance?' Now supposedly Daniel was a student, attending lectures and studying the works of Aristotle and Euclid. But in fact, he had over the last year become the one thing, aside from the Grace of God, keeping Isaac Newton alive. He'd long since stopped asking him such annoying, pointless questions as 'Can you remember the last time you put food into your mouth' or 'Don't you suppose that a nap of an hour or two, once a night, might be good?' The only thing that really worked was to monitor Isaac until he physically collapsed on the table, then haul him into bed, like a grave-robber transporting his goods, then pursue his own studies nearby and keep on eye on him until consciousness began to return, and then, during the moments when Isaac still didn't know what day it was, and hadn't gone off on some fresh train of thought, shove milk and bread at him so he wouldn't starve all the way to death. He did all of this voluntarily – sacrificing his own education, and making a burnt offering of Drake's tuition payments – because he considered it his Christian duty. Isaac, still in theory his sizar, had become his master, and Daniel the attentive servant. Of course Isaac was completely unaware of all Daniel's efforts – which only made it a more perfect specimen of Christlike self-abnegation. Daniel was like one of those Papist fanatics who, after they died, were found to've been secretly wearing hair-shirts underneath their satin vestments. 'The diagram may give you a better comprehension of the design of tonight's experiment,' Isaac said. He'd drawn a cross-sectional view of eyeball, hand, and darning-needle in his Waste Book. It was the closest thing to a work of art he had produced since the strange events of Whitsunday last year – since that date, only equations had flowed from his pen. 'May I ask why you are doing this?' 'Theory of Colors is part of the Program,' Isaac said – referring (Daniel knew) to a list of philosophical questions Isaac had recently written out in his Waste Book, and the studies he had pursued, entirely on his own, in hopes of answering them. Between the two young men in this room – Newton with his Program and Waterhouse with his God-given responsibility to keep the other from killing himself – neither had attended a single lecture, or had any contact with actual members of the faculty, in over a year. Isaac continued, 'I've been reading Boyle's latest – Experiments and Considerations Touching Colors – and it occurred to me: he uses his eyes to make all of his observations – his eyes are therefore instruments, like telescopes – but does he really understand how those instruments work? An astronomer who did not understand his lenses would be a poor philosopher indeed.' Daniel might have said any number of things then, but what came out was, 'How may I assist you?' And it was not just being a simpering toady. He was, for a moment, gobsmacked by the sheer presumption of a mere student, twenty-one years old, with no degree, calling into question the great Boyle's ability to make simple observations. But in the next moment it occurred to Daniel for the first time: What if Newton was right, and all the others wrong? It was a difficult thing to believe. On the other hand, he wanted to believe it, because if it were true, it meant that in failing to attend so many lectures he had missed precisely nothing, and in acting as Newton's manservant he was getting the best education in natural philosophy a man could ever have. 'I need you to draw a reticule on a leaf of paper and then hold it up at various measured distances from my cornea – as you do, I'll move the darning needle up and down – creating greater and lesser distortions in the shape of my eyeball – I say, I'll do that with one hand, and take notes of what I see with the other.' So the night proceeded – by sunrise, Isaac Newton knew more about the human eye than anyone who had ever lived, and Daniel knew more than anyone save Isaac. The experiment could have been performed by anyone. Only one person had actually done it, however. Newton pulled the needle out of his eye, which was blood-red, and swollen nearly shut. He turned to another part of the Waste Book and began wrestling with some difficult math out of Cartesian analysis while Daniel stumbled downstairs and went to church. The sun turned the stained-glass windows of the chapel into matrices of burning jewels. Daniel saw in a way he'd never seen anything before: his mind was a homunculus squatting in the middle of his skull, peering out through good but imperfect telescopes and listening-horns, gathering observations that had been distorted along the way, as a lens put chromatic aberrations into all the light that passed through it. A man who peered out at the world through a telescope would assume that the aberration was real, that the stars actually looked like that – what false assumptions, then, had natural philosophers been making about the evidence of their senses, until last night? Sitting in the gaudy radiance of those windows hearing the organ play and the choir sing, his mind pleasantly intoxicated from exhaustion, Daniel experienced a faint echo of what it must be like, all the time, to be Isaac Newton: a permanent ongoing epiphany, an endless immersion in lurid radiance, a drowning in light, a ringing of cosmic harmonies in the ears. AboardMinerva, Massachusetts Bay OCTOBER 1713 DANIEL BECOMES AWARE that someone is standing over him as he lies on the deck: a stubby red-headed and -bearded man with a lit cigar in his mouth, and spectacles with tiny circular lenses: it's van Hoek, the captain, just checking to see whether his passenger will have to be buried at sea tomorrow. Daniel sits up, finally, and introduces himself, and van Hoek says very little – probably pretending to know less English than he really does, so Daniel won't be coming to his cabin and pestering him at all hours. He leads Daniel aft along Minerva 's main deck (which is called the upperdeck, even though, at the ends of the ship, there other other decks above it) and up a staircase to the quarter-deck and shows him to a cabin. Even van Hoek, who can be mistaken for a stout ten-year-old if you see him from behind, has to crouch to avoid banging his head on the subtly arched joists that support the poop deck overhead. He raises one arm above his head and steadies himself against a low beam – touching it not with a hand, but a brass hook. Even though small and low-ceilinged, the cabin is perfectly all right – a chest, a lantern, and a bed consisting of a wooden box containing a canvas sack stuffed with straw. The straw is fresh, and its aroma will continue to remind Daniel of the green fields of Massachusetts all the way to England. Daniel strips off just a few items of clothing, curls up, and sleeps. When he wakes up, the sun is in his eyes. The cabin has a small window (its forward bulkhead is deeply sheltered under the poop deck and so it is safe to put panes of glass there). And since they are sailing eastwards, the rising sun shines into it directly – along the way, it happens to beam directly through the huge spoked wheel by which the ship is steered. This is situated just beneath the edge of that same poop deck so that the steersman can take shelter from the weather while enjoying a clear view forward down almost the entire length of Minerva.At the moment, loops of rope have been cast over a couple of the handles at the ends of the wheel's spokes and tied down to keep the rudder fixed in one position. No one is at the wheel, and it's neatly dividing the red disk of the rising sun into sectors. College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, Cambridge 1664 IN THE GREAT COURT of Trinity there was a sundial Isaac Newton didn't like: a flat disk divided by labeled spokes with a gnomon angling up from the center, naïvely copied from Roman designs, having a certain Classical elegance, and always wrong. Newton was constructing a sundial on a south-facing wall, using, as gnomon, a slender rod with a ball on the end. Every sunny day the ball's shadow would trace a curve across the wall – a slightly different curve every day, because the tilt of the earth's axis slowly changed through the seasons. That sheaf of curves made a fine set of astronomical data but not a usable timepiece. To tell time, Isaac (or his faithful assistant, Daniel Waterhouse) had to make a little cross-tick at the place the gnomon's shadow stood when Trinity's bell (always just a bit out of synchronization with King's) rang each of the day's hours. In theory, after 365 repetitions of this daily routine, each of the curves would be marked with ticks for 8:00a.m. , 9:00a.m. , and so on. By connecting those ticks – drawing a curve that passed through all of the eight o'clock ticks, another through all of the nine o'clock ticks, and so on – Isaac produced a second family of curves, roughly parallel to one another and roughly perpendicular to the day curves. One evening, about two hundred days and over a thousand cross-ticks into this procedure, Daniel asked Isaac why he found sundials so interesting. Isaac got up, fled the room, and ran off in the direction of the Backs. Daniel let him be for a couple of hours and then went out looking for him. Eventually, at about two o'clock in the morning, he found Isaac standing in the middle of Jesus Green, contemplating his own long shadow in the light of a full moon. 'It was a sincere request for information – nothing more – I want you to convey to me whatever it is about sundials I've been too thick-headed to find very interesting.' This seemed to calm Isaac down, though he did not apologize for having thought the worst about Daniel. He said something along the lines of: 'Heavenly radiance fills the æther, its rays parallel and straight and, so long as nothing is there to interrupt them, invisible. The secrets of God's creation are all told by those rays, but told in a language we do not understand, or even hear – the direction from which they shine, the spectrum of colors concealed within the light, these are all characters in a cryptogram. The gnomon – look at our shadows on the Green! We are the gnomon. We interrupt that light and we are warmed and illuminated by it. By stopping the light, we destroy part of the message without understanding it. We cast a shadow, a hole in the light, a ray of darkness that is shaped like ourselves – some might say that it contains no information save the profile of our own forms – but they are wrong. By recording the stretching and skewing of our shadows, we can attain part of the knowledge hidden in the cryptogram. All we need to make the necessary observations is a fixed regular surface – a plane – against which to cast the shadow. Descartes gave us the plane.' And so from then onwards Daniel understood that the point of this grueling sundial project was not merely to plot the curves, but to understand why each curve was shaped as it was. To put it another way, Isaac wanted to be able to walk up to a blank wall on a cloudy day, stab a gnomon into it, and draw all of the curves simply by knowing where the shadow would pass. This was the same thing as knowing where the sun would be in the sky, and that was the same as knowing where the earth was in its circuit around the sun, and in its daily rotation. Though, as months went on, Daniel understood that Isaac wanted to be able to do the same thing even if the blank wall happened to be situated on, say, the moon that Christian Huygens had lately discovered revolving around Saturn. Exactly how this might be accomplished was a question with ramifications that extended into such fields as: Would Isaac (and Daniel, for that matter) be thrown out of Trinity College? Were the Earth, and all the works of Man, nearing the end of a long relentless decay that had begun with the expulsion from Eden and that would very soon culminate in the Apocalypse? Or might things actually be getting better, with the promise of continuing to do so? Did people have souls? Did they have Free Will? Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) AboardMinerva, Massachusetts Bay OCTOBER 1713 Hereby it is manifest, that during the time men live without a common power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is called war; and such a war, as is of every man, against every man. For WAR, consisteth not in battle only, or the act of fighting; but in a tract of time, wherein the will to contend by battle is sufficiently known. – HOBBES, Leviathan NOW WALKING OUT ONTO the upperdeck to find Minerva sailing steadily eastwards on calm seas, Daniel's appalled that anyone ever doubted these matters. The horizon is a perfect line, the sun a red circle tracing a neat path in the sky and proceeding through an orderly series of color-changes, red-yellow-white. Thus Nature. Minerva:the human world – is a family of curves. There are no straight lines here. The decks are slightly arched to shed water and supply greater strength, the masts flexed, impelled by the thrust of the sails but restrained by webs of rigging: curve-grids like Isaac's sundial lines. Of course, wherever wind collects in a sail or water skims around the hull it follows rules that Bernoulli has set down using the calculus – Leibniz's version. Minerva is a congregation of Leibniz-curves navigating according to Bernoulli-rules across a vast, mostly water-covered sphere whose size, precise shape, trajectory through the heavens, and destiny were all laid down by Newton. One cannot board a ship without imagining ship-wreck. Daniel envisions it as being like an opera, lasting several hours and proceeding through a series of Acts. Act I: The hero rises to clear skies and smooth sailing. The sun is following a smooth and well-understood cœlestial curve, the sea is a plane, sailors are strumming guitars and carving objets d'art from walrus tusks, et cetera, while erudite passengers take the air and muse about grand philosophical themes. Act II: A change in the weather is predicted based upon readings in the captain's barometer. Hours later it appears in the distance, a formation of clouds that is observed, sketched, and analyzed. Sailors cheerfully prepare for weather. Act III: The storm hits. Changes are noted on the barometer, thermometer, clinometer, compass, and other instruments – cœlestial bodies are, however, no longer visible – the sky is a boiling chaos torn unpredictably by bolts – the sea is rough, the ship heaves, the cargo remains tied safely down, but most passengers are too ill or worried to think. The sailors are all working without rest – some of them sacrifice chickens in hopes of appeasing their gods. The rigging glows with St. Elmo's Fire – this is attributed to supernatural forces. Act IV: The masts snap and the rudder goes missing. There is panic. Lives are already being lost, but it is not known how many. Cannons and casks are careering randomly about, making it impossible to guess who'll be alive and who dead ten seconds from now. The compass, barometer, et cetera, are all destroyed and the records of their readings swept overboard – maps dissolve – sailors are helpless – those who are still alive and sentient can think of nothing to do but pray. Act V: The ship is no more. Survivors cling to casks and planks, fighting off the less fortunate and leaving them to drown. Everyone has reverted to a feral state of terror and misery. Huge waves shove them around without any pattern, carnivorous fish use living persons as food. There is no relief in sight, or even imaginable. – There might also be an Act VI in which everyone was dead, but it wouldn't make for good opera so Daniel omits it. Men of his generation were born during Act V*and raised in Act IV. As students, they huddled in a small vulnerable bubble of Act III. The human race has, actually, been in Act V for most of history and has recently accomplished the miraculous feat of assembling splintered planks afloat on a stormy sea into a sailing-ship and then, having climbed onboard it, building instruments with which to measure the world, and then finding a kind of regularity in those measurements. When they were at Cambridge, Newton was surrounded by a personal nimbus of Act II and was well on his way to Act I. But they had, perversely, been living among people who were peering into the wrong end of the telescope, or something, and who had convinced themselves that the opposite was true – that the world had once been a splendid, orderly place – that men had made a reasonably trouble-free move from the Garden of Eden to the Athens of Plato and Aristotle, stopping over in the Holy Land to encrypt the secrets of the Universe in the pages of the Bible, and that everything had been slowly, relentlessly falling apart ever since. Cambridge was run by a mixture of fogeys too old to be considered dangerous, and Puritans who had been packed into the place by Cromwell after he'd purged all the people he did consider dangerous. With a few exceptions such as Isaac Barrow, none of them would have had any use for Isaac's sundial, because it didn't look like an old sundial, and they'd prefer telling time wrong the Classical way to telling it right the newfangled way. The curves that Newton plotted on the wall were a methodical document of their wrongness – a manifesto like Luther's theses on the church-door. In explaining why those curves were as they were, the Fellows of Cambridge would instinctively use Euclid's geometry: the earth is a sphere. Its orbit around the sun is an ellipse – you get an ellipse by constructing a vast imaginary cone in space and then cutting through it with an imaginary plane; the intersection of the cone and the plane is the ellipse. Beginning with these primitive objects (viz. the tiny sphere revolving around the place where the gigantic cone was cut by the imaginary plane), these geometers would add on more spheres, cones, planes, lines, and other elements – so many that if you could look up and see 'em, the heavens would turn nearly black with them – until at last they had found a way to account for the curves that Newton had drawn on the wall. Along the way, every step would be verified by applying one or the other of the rules that Euclid had proved to be true, two thousand years earlier, in Alexandria, where everyone had been a genius. Isaac hadn't studied Euclid that much, and hadn't cared enough to study him well. If he wanted to work with a curve he would instinctively write it down, not as an intersection of planes and cones, but as a series of numbers and letters: an algebraic expression. That only worked if there was a language, or at least an alphabet, that had the power of expressing shapes without literally depicting them, a problem that Monsieur Descartes had lately solved by (first) conceiving of curves, lines, et cetera, as being collections of individual points and (then) devising a way to express a point by giving its coordinates – two numbers, or letters representing numbers, or (best of all) algebraic expressions that could in principle be evaluated to generate numbers. This translated all geometry to a new language with its own set of rules: algebra. The construction of equations was an exercise in translation. By following those rules, one could create new statements that were true, without even having to think about what the symbols referred to in any physical universe. It was this seemingly occult power that scared the hell out of some Puritans at the time, and even seemed to scare Isaac a bit. By 1664, which was the year that Isaac and Daniel were supposed to get their degrees or else leave Cambridge, Isaac, by taking the very latest in imported Cartesian analysis and then extending it into realms unknown, was (unbeknownst to anyone except Daniel) accomplishing things in the field of natural philosophy that his teachers at Trinity could not even comprehend, much less accomplish – they, meanwhile, were preparing to subject Isaac and Daniel to the ancient and traditional ordeal of examinations designed to test their knowledge of Euclid. If they failed these exams, they'd be branded a pair of dimwitted failures and sent packing. As the date drew nearer, Daniel began to mention them more and more frequently to Isaac. Eventually they went to see Isaac Barrow, the first Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, because he was conspicuously a better mathematician than the rest. Also because recently, when Barrow had been traveling in the Mediterranean, the ship on which he'd been passenger had been assaulted by pirates, and Barrow had gone abovedecks with a cutlass and helped fight them off. As such, he did not seem like the type who would really care in what order students learned the material. They were right about that – when Isaac showed up one day, alarmingly late in his academic career, with a few shillings, and bought a copy of Barrow's Latin translation of Euclid, Barrow didn't seem to mind. It was a tiny book with almost no margins, but Isaac wrote in the margins anyway, in nearly microscopic print. Just as Barrow had translated Euclid's Greek into the universal tongue of Latin, Isaac translated Euclid's ideas (expressed as curves and surfaces) into Algebra. Half a century later on the deck of Minerva, that's all Daniel can remember about their Classical education; they took the exams, did indifferently (Daniel did better than Isaac), and were given new titles: they were now scholars, meaning that they had scholarships, meaning that Newton would not have to go back home to Woolsthorpe and become a gentleman-farmer. They would continue to share a chamber at Trinity, and Daniel would continue to learn more from Isaac's idle musings than he would from the entire apparatus of the University. ONCE HE'S HAD THE OPPORTUNITY to settle in aboard Minerva, Daniel realizes it's certain that when, God willing, he reaches London, he'll be asked to provide a sort of affidavit telling what he knows about the invention of the calculus. As long as the ship's not moving too violently, he sits down at the large dining-table in the common-room, one deck below his cabin, and tries to organize his thoughts. Some weeks after we had received our Scholarships, probably in the Spring of 1665, Isaac Newton and I decided to walk out to Stourbridge Fair. Reading it back to himself, he scratches out probably in and writes in certainly no later than. Here Daniel leaves much out – it was Isaac who'd announced he was going. Daniel had decided to come along to look after him. Isaac had grown up in a small town and never been to London. To him, Cambridge was a big city – he was completely unequipped for Stourbridge Fair, which was one of the biggest in Europe. Daniel had been there many times with father Drake or half-brother Raleigh, and knew what not to do, anyway. The two of us went out back of Trinity and began to walk downstream along the Cam. After passing by the bridge in the center of town that gives the City and University their name, we entered into a reach along the north side of Jesus Green where the Cam describes a graceful curve in the shape of an elongated S. Daniel almost writes like the integration symbol used in the calculus. But he suppresses that, since that symbol, and indeed the term calculus , were invented by Leibniz. I made some waggish student-like remark about this curve, as curves had been much on our minds the previous year, and Newton began to speak with confidence and enthusiasm – demonstrating that the ideas he spoke of were not extemporaneous speculation but a fully developed theory on which he had been working for some time. 'Yes, and suppose we were on one of those punts,' Newton said, pointing to one of the narrow, flat-bottomed boats that idle students used to mess about on the Cam. 'And suppose that the Bridge was the Origin of a system of Cartesian coordinates covering Jesus Green and the other land surrounding the river's course.' No, no, no, no. Daniel dips his quill and scratches that bit out. It is an anachronism. Worse, it's a Leibnizism. Natural Philosophers may talk that way in 1713, but they didn't fifty years ago. He has to translate it back into the sort of language that Descartes would have used. 'And suppose,' Newton continued, 'that we had a rope with regularly spaced knots, such as mariners use to log their speed, and we anchored one end of it on the Bridge – for the Bridge is a fixed point in absolute space. If that rope were stretched tight it would be akin to one of the numbered lines employed by Monsieur Descartes in his Geometry. By stretching it between the Bridge and the punt, we could measure how far the punt had drifted down-river, and in which direction.' Actually, this is not the way Isaac ever would have said it. But Daniel's writing this for princes and parliamentarians, not Natural Philosophers, and so he has to put long explanations in Isaac's mouth. 'And lastly suppose that the Cam flowed always at the same speed, and that our punt matched it. That is what I call a fluxion – a flowing movement along the curve over time. I think you can see that as we rounded the first limb of the S-curve around Jesus College, where the river bends southward, our fluxion in the north-south direction would be steadily changing. At the moment we passed under the Bridge, we'd be pointed northeast, and so we would have a large northwards fluxion. A minute later, when we reached the point just above Jesus College, we'd be going due east, and so our north-south fluxion would be zero. A minute after that, after we'd curved round and drawn alongside Midsummer Commons, we'd be headed southeast, meaning that we would have developed a large southward fluxion – but even that would reduce and tend back towards zero as the stream curved round northwards again towards Stourbridge Fair.' He can stop here. For those who know how to read between the lines, this is sufficient to prove Newton had the calculus – or Fluxions, as he called it – in '65, most likely '64. No point in beating them over the head with it . . . Yes, beating someone over the head is the entire point. Banks of the River Cam 1665 Almost five thousand years agone, there were pilgrims walking to the Celestial City, as these two honest persons are; and Beelzebub, Apollyon, and Legion, with their companions, perceiving by the path that the pilgrims made that their way to the City lay through this town of Vanity, they contrived here to set up a fair; a fair wherein should be sold all sorts of vanity, and that it should last all the year long. Therefore at this Fair are all such merchandise sold, as houses, lands, trades, places, honours, preferments, titles, countries, kingdoms, lusts, pleasures, and delights of all sorts, as whores, bawds, wives, husbands, children, masters, servants, lives, blood, bodies, souls, silver, gold, pearls, precious stones, and what not. And moreover, at this Fair there is at all times to be seen jugglings, cheats, games, plays, fools, apes, knaves, and rogues, and that of all sorts. – JOHN BUNYAN, The Pilgrim's Progress IT WAS LESS THAN AN hour's walk to the Fair, strolling along gently sloped green banks with weeping-willows, beneath whose canopies were hidden various prostrate students. Black cattle mowed the grass unevenly and strewed cow-pies along their way. At first the river was shallow enough to wade across, and its bottom was carpeted with slender fronds that, near the top, were bent slightly downstream by the mild current. 'Now, there is a curve whose fluxion in the downstream direction is nil at the point where it is rooted in the bottom – that is to say, it rises vertically from the mud – but increases as it rises.' Here Daniel was a bit lost. 'Fluxion seems to mean a flowing over time – so it makes perfect sense when you apply the word to the position of a punt on a river, which is, as a matter of fact, flowing over time. But now you seem to be applying it to the shape of a weed, which is not flowing – it's just standing there sort of bent.' 'But Daniel, the virtue of this approach is that it doesn't matter what the actual physical situation is, a curve is ever a curve, and whatever you can do to the curve of a river you can do just as rightly to the curve of a weed:we are free from all that old nonsense now.' Meaning the Aristotelian approach, in which such easy mixing of things with obviously different natures would be abhorrent. All that mattered henceforth, apparently, was what form they adopted when translated into the language of analysis. 'Translating a thing into the analytical language is akin to what the alchemist does when he extracts, from some crude ore, a pure spirit, or virtue, or pneuma. The fœces – the gross external forms of things – which only mislead and confuse us – are cast off to reveal the underlying spirit. And when this is done we may learn that some things that are superficially different are, in their real nature, the same.' Very soon, as they left the colleges behind, the Cam became broader and deeper and instantly was crowded with much larger boats. Still, they were not boats for the ocean – they were long, narrow, and flat-bottomed, made for rivers and canals, but with far greater displacement than the little punts. Stourbridge Fair was already audible: the murmur of thousands of haggling buyers and sellers, barking of dogs, wild strains from bagpipes and shawms whipping over their heads like twists of bright ribbon unwinding in the breeze. They looked at the boat-people: Independent traders in black hats and white neck-cloths, waterborne Gypsies, ruddy Irish and Scottish men, and simply Englishmen with complicated personal stories, negotiating with sure-footed boat-dogs, throwing buckets of mysterious fluids overboard, pursuing domestic arguments with unseen persons in the tents or shacks pitched on their decks. Then they rounded a bend, and there was the Fair, spread out in a vast wedge of land, bigger than Cambridge, even more noisy, much more crowded. It was mostly tents and tent-people, who were not their kind of people – Daniel watched Isaac gain a couple of inches in height as he remembered the erect posture that Puritans used to set a better example. In some secluded parts of the Fair (Daniel knew) serious merchants were trading cattle, timber, iron, barrelled oysters – anything that could be brought upriver this far on a boat, or transported overland in a wagon. But this wholesale trade wanted to be invisible, and was. What Isaac saw was a retail fair whose size and gaudiness was all out of proportion to its importance, at least if you went by the amount of money that changed hands. The larger avenues (which meant sluices of mud with planks and logs strewn around for people to step on, or at least push off against) were lined with tents of rope-dancers, jugglers, play-actors, puppet shows, wrestling-champions, dancing-girls, and of course the speciality prostitutes who made the Fair such an important resource for University students. But going up into the smaller byways, they found the tables and stalls and the cleverly fashioned unfolding wagons of traders who'd brought goods from all over Europe, up the Ouse and the Cam to this place to sell them to England. Daniel and Isaac roamed for the better part of an hour, ignoring the shouts and pleadings of the retailers on all sides, until finally Isaac stopped, alert, and sidestepped over to a small folding display-case-on-legs that a tall slender Jew in a black coat had set up. Daniel eyed this Son of Moses curiously – Cromwell had re-admitted these people to England only ten years previously, after they'd been excluded for centuries, and they were as exotic as giraffes. But Isaac was staring at a constellation of gemlike objects laid out on a square of black velvet. Noting his interest, the Kohan folded back the edges of the cloth to reveal many more: concave and convex lenses, flat disks of good glass for grinding your own, bottles of abrasive powder in several degrees of coarseness, and prisms. Isaac signalled that he would be willing to open negotiations over two of the prisms. The lens-grinder inhaled, drew himself up, and blinked. Daniel moved round to a supporting position behind and to the side of Isaac. 'You have pieces of eight,' the circumcised one said – midway between an assertion and a question. 'I know that your folk once lived in a kingdom where that was the coin of the realm, sir,' Isaac said, 'but . . .' 'You know nothing – my people did not come from Spain. They came from Poland. You have French coins – the louis d'or?' 'The louis d'or is a beautiful coin, befitting the glory of the Sun King,' Daniel put in, 'and probably much used wherever you came from – Amsterdam?' 'London. You intend to compensate me, then, with what – Joachimsthalers?' 'As you, sir, are English, and so am I, let us use English means.' 'You wish to trade cheese? Tin? Broadcloth?' 'How many shillings will buy these two prisms?' The Hebraic one adopted a haggard, suffering look and gazed at a point above their heads. 'Let me see the color of your money,' he said, in a voice that conveyed gentle regret, as if Isaac might have bought some prisms today, and instead would only get a dreary lesson in the unbelievable shabbiness of English coinage. Isaac reached into a pocket and wiggled his fingers to produce a metallic tromping noise that proved many coins were in there. Then he pulled out a handful and let the lens-grinder have a glimpse of a few coins, tarnished black. Daniel, so far, was startled by how good Isaac was at this kind of thing. On the other hand, he had made a business out of lending money to other students – maybe he had talent. 'You must have made a mistake,' said the Jew. 'Which is perfectly all right – we all make mistakes. You reached into the wrong pocket and you pulled out your black money* – the stuff you throw to beggars.' 'Ahem, er, so I did,' Isaac said. 'Pardon me – where's the money for paying merchants?' Patting a few other pockets. 'By the way, assuming I'm not going to offer you black money, how many shillings?' 'When you say shillings, I assume you mean the new ones?' 'The James I?' 'No, no, James I died half a century ago and so one would not normally use the adjective new to describe pounds minted during his reign.' 'Did you say pounds ?' Daniel asked. 'A pound is rather a lot of money, and so it strikes me as not relevant to this transaction, which has all the appearances of a shilling type of affair at most .' 'Let us use the word coins until I know whether you speak of the new or the old.' ' Newmeaning the coins minted, say, during our lifetimes?' 'I mean the Restoration coinage,' the Israelite said, 'or perhaps your professors have neglected to inform you that Cromwell is dead, and Interregnum coins demonetized these last three years.' 'Why, I believe I have heard that the King is beginning to mint new coins,' Isaac said, looking to Daniel for confirmation. 'My half-brother in London knows someone who saw a goldcarolus ii dei gratia coin once, displayed in a crystal case on a silken pillow,' Daniel said. 'People have begun to call them Guineas, because they are made of gold that the Duke of York's company is taking out of Africa.' 'I say, Daniel, is it true what they say, that those coins are perfectly circular?' 'They are, Isaac – not like the good old English hammered coins that you and I carry in such abundance in our pockets and purses.' 'Furthermore,' said the Ashkenazi, 'the King brought with him a French savant, Monsieur Blondeau, on loan from King Louis, and that fellow built a machine that mills delicate ridges and inscriptions into the edges of the coins.' 'Typical French extravagance,' Isaac said. 'The King really did spend more time than was good for him in Paris,' Daniel said. 'On the contrary,' the forelocked one said, 'if someone clips or files a bit of metal off the edge of a round coin with a milled edge, it is immediately obvious.' 'That must be why everyone is melting those new coins down as fast as they are minted, and shipping the metal to the Orient . . . ?' Daniel began, “. . . making it impossible for the likes of me and my friend to obtain them,' Isaac finished. 'Now there is a good idea – if you can show me coins of a bright silver color – not that black stuff – I'll weigh them and accept them as bullion.' ' Bullion!Sir!' 'Yes.' 'I have heard that this is the practice in China,' Isaac said sagely. 'But here in England, a shilling is a shilling.' “No matter how little it weighs!?' 'Yes. In principle, yes.' 'So when a lump of metal is coined in the Mint, it takes on a magical power of shillingness, and even after it has been filed and clipped and worn down to a mere featureless nodule, it is still worth a full shilling?' 'You exaggerate,' Daniel said. 'I have here a fine Queen Elizabeth shilling, for example – which I carry around, mind you, as a souvenir of Gloriana's reign, since it is far too fine a specimen to actually spend. But as you can see, it is just as bright and shiny as the day it was minted – ' 'Especially where it's recently been clipped there along the side,' the lens-grinder said. 'Normal, pleasing irregularity of the hand-hammered currency, nothing more.' Isaac said, 'My friend's shilling, though magnificent, and arguably worth two or even three shillings in the market, is no anomaly. Here I have a shilling from the reign of Edward VI, which I obtained after an inebriated son of a Duke, who happened to have borrowed a shilling from me some time earlier, fell unconscious on a floor – the purse in which he carried his finest coins fell open and this rolled out of it – I construed this as repayment of the debt, and the exquisite condition of the coin as interest.' 'How could it roll when three of its edges are flat? It is nearly triangular,' the lens-grinder said. 'A trick of the light.' 'The problem with that Edward VI coinage is that for all I knew it might've been issued during the Great Debasement, when, before Sir Thomas Gresham could get matters in hand, prices doubled.' 'The inflation was not because the coins were debased, as some believe,' Daniel said, 'it was because the wealth confiscated from the Papist monasteries, and cheap silver from the mines of New Spain, were flooding the country.' 'If you would allow me to approach within ten feet of these coins, it would help me to appreciate their numismatic excellence,' the lens-grinder said. 'I could even use some of my magnifying-lenses to . . .' 'I'm afraid I would be offended,' Isaac said. 'You could inspect this one as closely as you wanted,' Daniel said, 'and find no evidence of criminal tampering – I got it from a blind innkeeper who had suffered frostbite in the fingertips – had no idea what he was giving me.' 'Didn't he think to bite down on it? Like so?' said the Judaic individual, taking the shilling and crushing it between his rear molars. 'What would he have learned by doing that, sir?' 'That whatever counterfeit-artist stamped it out, had used reasonably good metal – not above fifty percent lead.' 'We'll choose to interpret that as a wry jest,' Daniel said, 'the likes of which you could never direct against this shilling, which my half-brother found lying on the ground at the Battle of Naseby, not far from fragments of a Royalist captain who'd been blown to pieces by a bursting cannon – the dead man was, you see, a captain who'd once stood guard at the Tower of London where new coins are minted.' The Jew repeated the biting ceremony, then scratched at the coin in case it was a brass clinker japanned with silver paint. 'Worthless. But I owe a shilling to a certain vile man in London, a hater of Jews, and I would drive a shilling's worth of satisfaction from slipping this slug of pig-iron into his hand.' 'Very well, then – ' said Isaac, reaching for the prisms. 'Avid collectors such as you two must also have pennies – ?' 'My father hands out shiny new ones as Christmas presents,' Daniel began. 'Three years ago – ' but he suspended the anecdote when he noticed that the lens-grinder was paying attention, not to him, but to a commotion behind them. Daniel turned around and saw that it was a man, reasonably well-heeled, having trouble walking even though a friend and a servant were supporting him. He had a powerful desire to lie down, it seemed, which was most awkward, as he happened to be wading through ankle-deep mud. The servant slipped a hand between the man's upper arm and his ribs to bear him up, but the man shrieked like a cat who's been mangled under a cart-wheel and convulsed backwards and landed full-length on his back, hurling up a coffin-shaped wave of mud that spattered things yards away. 'Take your prisms,' said the merchant, practically stuffing them into Isaac's pocket. He began folding up his display-case. If he felt the way Daniel did, then it wasn't the sight of a man feeling ill, or falling down, that made him pack up and leave, so much as the sound of that scream. Isaac was walking toward the sick man with the cautious but direct gait of a tightrope-walker. 'Shall we back to Cambridge, then?' Daniel suggested. 'I have some knowledge of the arts of the apothecary.' Isaac said, 'Perhaps I could help him.' A circle of people had gathered to observe the sick man, but it was a very broad circle, empty except for Isaac and Daniel. The victim appeared, now, to be trying to get his breeches off. But his arms were rigid, so he was trying to do it by writhing free of his clothes. His servant and his friend were tugging at the cuffs, but the breeches seemed to've shrunk onto his legs. Finally the friend drew his dagger, slashed through the cuffs left and right, and then ripped the pant-legs open from bottom to top – or perhaps the force of the swelling thighs burst them. They came off, anyway. Friend and servant backed away, affording Isaac and Daniel a clear vantage point that would have enabled them to see all the way up to the man's groin, if the view hadn't been blocked by black globes of taut flesh stacked like cannonballs up his inner thighs. The man had stopped writhing and screaming now because he was dead. Daniel had taken Isaac's arm and was rather firmly pulling him back, but Isaac continued to approach the specimen. Daniel looked round and saw that suddenly there was no one within musket range – horses and tents had been abandoned, back-loads of goods spilled on the ground by porters now halfway to Ely. 'I can see the buboes expanding even though the body is dead,' Isaac said. 'The generative spirit lives on – transmuting dead flesh into something else – just as maggots are generated out of meat, and silver grows beneath mountains – why does it bring death sometimes and life others?' That they lived was evidence that Daniel eventually pulled Isaac away and got him pointed back up the river toward Cambridge. But Isaac's mind was still on those Satanic miracles that had appeared in the dead man's groin. 'I admire Monsieur Descartes' analysis, but there is something missing in his supposition that the world is just bits of matter jostling one another like coins shaken in a bag. How could that account for the ability of matter to organize itself into eyes and leaves and salamanders, to transmute itself into alternate forms? And yet it's not simply that matter comes together in good ways – not some ongoing miraculous Creation – for the same process by which our bodies turn meat and milk into flesh and blood can also cause a man's body to convert itself into a mass of buboes in a few hours' time. It might seem aimless, but it cannot be. That one man sickens and dies, while another flourishes, are characters in the cryptic message that philosophers seek to decode.' 'Unless the message was set down long ago and is there in the Bible for all men to read plainly,' Daniel said. Fifty years later, he hates to remember that he ever talked this way, but he can't stop himself. 'What do you mean by that?' 'The year 1665 is halfway over – you know what year comes next. I must to London, Isaac. Plague has come to England. What we have seen today is a harbinger of the Apocalypse.' AboardMinerva, off the Coast of New England NOVEMBER 1713 DANIEL IS ROUSED by a rooster on the forecastledeck*that is growing certain it's not just imagining that light in the eastern sky. Unfortunately, the eastern sky is off to port this morning. Yesterday it was to starboard. Minerva has been sailing up and down the New England coast for the better part of a fortnight, trying to catch a wind that will decisively take her out into the deep water, or 'off soundings,' as they say. They are probably not more than fifty miles away from Boston. He goes below to the gun deck, a dim slab of sharp-smelling air. When his eyes have adjusted he can see the cannons, all swung around on their low carriages so they are parallel to the hull planking, aimed forwards, lashed in place, and the heavy hatches closed over the gun ports. Now that he cannot see the horizon, he must use the soles of his feet to sense the ship's rolling and pitching – if he waits for his balance-sense to tell him he's falling, it'll be too late. He makes his way aft in very short, carefully planned steps, trailing fingertips along the ceiling, jostling the long ramrods and brushes racked up there for tending the guns. This takes him to a door and thence into a cabin at the stern that's as wide as the entire ship and fitted with a sweep of windows, gathering what light they can from the western sky and the setting moon. Half a dozen men are in here working and talking, all of them relatively old and sophisticated compared to ordinary seamen – this is where great chests full of good tools are stored, and sheets of potent diagrams nested. A tiller the dimensions of a battering-ram runs straight down the middle of the ceiling and out through a hole in the stern to the rudder, which it controls; the forward end of the tiller is pulled to and fro by a couple of cables that pass up through openings in the decks to the wheel. The air smells of coffee, wood-shavings, and pipe-smoke. Grudging hellos are scattered about. Daniel goes back and sits by one of the windows – these are undershot so that he can look straight down and see Minerva 's wake being born in a foamy collision down around the rudder. He opens a small hatch below a window and drops out a Fahrenheit thermometer on a string. It is the very latest in temperature measurement technology from Europe – Enoch presented it to him as a sort of party favor. He lets it bounce through the surf for a few minutes, then hauls it in and takes a reading. He's been trying to perform this ritual every four hours – the objective being to see if there's anything to the rumor that the North Atlantic is striped with currents of warm water. He can present the data to the Royal Society if-God-willing-he-reaches-London. At first he did it from the upperdeck, but he didn't like the way the instrument got battered against the hull, and he was wearied by the looks of incomprehension on the sailors' faces. The old gaffers back here don't necessarily think he's any less crazy but they don't think less of him for it. So like a sojourner in a foreign city who eventually finds a coffeehouse where he feels at home, Daniel has settled on this place, and been accepted here. The regulars are mostly in their thirties and forties: a Filipino; a Lascar; a half-African, half-white from the Portuguese city of Goa; a Huguenot; a Cornish man with surprisingly poor English; an Irishman. They're all perfectly at home here, as if Minerva were a thousand-year-old ship on which their ancestors had always lived. If she ever sinks, Daniel suspects they'll happily go down with her, for lack of any other place to live. Joined with one another and with Minerva, they have the power to travel anywhere on earth, fighting their way past pirates if need be, eating well, sleeping in their own beds. But if Minerva were lost, it almost wouldn't make any difference whether it spilled them into the North Atlantic in a January gale, or let them off gently into some port town – either way, it'd be a short, sad life for them after that. Daniel wishes there were a comforting analogy to the Royal Society to be made here, but as that lot are currently trying to throw one of their own number (Baron Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz) overboard, it doesn't really work. A brick-lined cabin is wedged between the upperdeck and the forecastledeck, always full of smoke because fires burn there – food comes out of it from time to time. A full meal is brought to Daniel once a day, and he takes it, usually by himself, sometimes with Captain van Hoek, in the common-room. He's the only passenger. Here it's evident that Minerva 's an old ship, because the crockery and flatware are motley, chipped, and worn. Those parts of the ship that matter have been maintained or replaced as part of what Daniel's increasingly certain must be a subtle, understated, but fanatical program of maintenance decreed by van Hoek and ramrodded by one of his mates. The crockery and other clues suggest that the ship's a good three decades old, but unless you go down into the hold and view the keel and the ribs, you don't see any pieces that are older than perhaps five years. None of the plates match, and so it's always a bit of a game for Daniel to eat his way down through the meal (normally something stewlike with expensive spices) until he can see the pattern on the plate. It is kind of an idiotic game for a Fellow of the Royal Society to indulge in, but he doesn't introspect about it until one evening when he's staring into his plate, watching the gravy slosh with the ship's heaving (a microcosm of the Atlantic?), and all of a sudden it's – The Plague Year SUMMER 1665 Th'earths face is but thy Table; there are set Plants, cattell, men, dishes for Death to eate. In a rude hunger now hee millions drawes Into his bloody, or plaguy, or sterv'd jawes. – JOHN DONNE , 'Elegie on M Boulstred' Daniel was eating potatoes and herring for the thirty-fifth consecutive day. As he was doing it in his father's house, he was expected loudly to thank God for the privilege before and after the meal. His prayers of gratitude were becoming less sincere by the day. To one side of the house, cattle voiced their eternal confusion – to the other, men trudged down the street ringing hand-bells (for those who could hear) and carrying long red sticks (for those who could see), peering into court-yards and doorways, and poking their snouts over garden-walls, scanning for bubonic corpses. Everyone else who had enough money to leave London was absent. That included Daniel's half-brothers Raleigh and Sterling and their families, as well as his half-sister Mayflower, who along with her children had gone to ground in Buckinghamshire. Only Mayflower's husband, Thomas Ham, and Drake Waterhouse, Patriarch, had refused to leave. Mr. Ham wanted to leave, but he had a cellar in the City to look after. The idea of leaving, just because of a spot of the old Black Death, hadn't even occurred to Drake yet. Both of his wives had died quite a while ago, his elder children had fled, there was no one left to talk sense into him except Daniel. Cambridge had been shut down for the duration of the Plague. Daniel had ventured down here for what he had envisioned as a quick, daring raid on an empty house, and had found Drake seated before a virginal playing old hymns from the Civil War. Having spent most of his good coins, first of all helping Newton buy prisms, and secondly bribing a reluctant coachman to bring him down within walking distance of this pest-hole, Daniel was stuck until he could get money out of Dad – a subject he was afraid to even broach. Since God had predestined all events anyway, there was no way for them to avoid the Plague, if that was their doom – and if it wasn't, why, no harm in staying there on the edge of the city and setting an example for the fleeing and/or dying populace. Owing to those modifications that had been made to his head at the behest of Archbishop Laud, Drake Waterhouse made curious percolating and whistling noises when he chewed and swallowed his potatoes and herring. In 1629, Drake and some friends had been arrested for distributing freshly printed libels in the streets of London. These particular libels inveighed against Ship Money, a new tax imposed by Charles I. But the topic did not matter; if this had happened in 1628, the libels would have been about something else, and no less offensive to the King and the Archbishop. An indiscreet remark made by one of Drake's comrades after burning sticks had been rammed under his nails led to the discovery of the printing-press that Drake had used to print the libels – he kept it in a wagon hidden under a pile of hay. So as he had now been exposed as the master-mind of the conspiracy, Bishop Laud had him, and a few other supremely annoying Calvinists, pilloried, branded, and mutilated. These were essentially practical techniques more than punishments. The intent was not to reform the criminals, who were clearly un-reformable. The pillory fixed them in one position for a while so that all London could come by and get a good look at their faces and thereafter recognize them. The branding and mutilation marked them permanently so that the rest of the world would know them. As all of this had happened years before Daniel had even been born, it didn't matter to him – this was just how Dad had always looked – and of course it had never mattered to Drake. Within a few weeks, Drake had been back on the highways of England, buying cloth that he'd later smuggle to the Netherlands. In a country inn, on the way to St. Ives, he encountered a saturnine, beetle-browed chap name of Oliver Cromwell who had recently lost his faith, and seen his life ruined – or so he imagined, until he got a look at Drake, and found God. But that was another story. The goal of all persons who had houses in those days was to possess the smallest number of pieces of furniture needed to sustain life, but to make them as large and heavy and dark as possible. Accordingly, Daniel and Drake ate their potatoes and herring on a table that had the size and weight of a medieval drawbridge. There was no other furniture in the room, although the eight-foot-high grandfather clock in the adjoining hall contributed a sort of immediate presence with the heaving to and fro of its cannonball-sized pendulum, which made the entire house lean from one side to the other like a drunk out for a brisk walk, and the palpable grinding of its gear-train, and the wild clamorous bonging that exploded from it at intervals that seemed suspiciously random, and that caused flocks of migrating waterfowl, thousands of feet overhead, to collide with each other in panic and veer into new courses. The fur of dust beginning to overhang its Gothick battlements; its internal supply of mouse-turds; the Roman numerals carven into the back by its maker; and its complete inability to tell time, all marked it as pre-Huygens technology. Its bonging would have tried Daniel's patience even if it had occurred precisely on the hour, half-hour, quarter-hour, et cetera, for it never failed to make him jump out of his skin. That it conveyed no information whatever as to what the time actually was, drove Daniel into such transports of annoyance that he had begun to entertain a phant'sy of standing at the intersection of two corridors and handing Drake, every time he passed by, a libel denouncing the ancient Clock, and demanding its wayward pendulum be stilled, and that it be replaced with a new Huygens model. But Drake had already told him to shut up about the clock, and so there was nothing he could do. Daniel was going for days without hearing any other sounds but these. All possible subjects of conversation could be divided into two categories: (1) ones that would cause Drake to unleash a rant, previously heard so many times that Daniel could recite it from memory, and (2) ones that might actually lead to original conversation. Daniel avoided Category 1 topics. All Category 2 topics had already been exhausted. For example, Daniel could not ask, 'How is Praise-God doing in Boston?'*because he had asked this on the first day, and Drake had answered it, and since then few letters had arrived because the letter-carriers were dead or running away from London as fast as they could go. Sometimes private couriers would come with letters, mostly pertaining to Drake's business matters but sometimes addressed to Daniel. This would provoke a flurry of conversation stretching out as long as half an hour (not counting rants), but mostly what Daniel heard, day after day, was corpse-collectors' bells, and their creaking carts; the frightful Clock; cows; Drake reading the Books of Daniel and of Revelation aloud, or playing the virginal; and the gnawing of Daniel's own quill across the pages of his notebook as he worked his way through Euclid, Copernicus, Galileo, Descartes, Huygens. He actually learned an appalling amount. In fact, he was fairly certain he'd caught up with where Isaac had been several months previously – but Isaac was up at home in Woolsthorpe, a hundred miles away, and no doubt years ahead of him by this point. He ate down to the bottom of his potatoes and herring with the determination of a prisoner clawing a hole through a wall, finally revealing the plate. The Waterhouse family china had been manufactured by sincere novices in Holland. After James I had outlawed the export of unfinished English cloth to the Netherlands, Drake had begun smuggling it there, which was easily done since the town of Leyden was crowded with English pilgrims. In this way Drake had made the first of several smuggling-related fortunes, and done so in a way pleasing in the sight of the Lord, viz. by boldly defying the King's efforts to meddle in commerce. Not only that but he had met and in 1617 married a pilgrim lass in Leyden, and he had made many donations there to the faithful who were in the market for a ship. The grateful congregation, shortly before embarking on the Mayflower, bound for sunny Virginia, had presented Drake and his new wife, Hortense, with this set of Delft pottery. They had obviously made it themselves on the theory that when they sloshed up onto the shores of America, they'd better know how to make stuff out of clay. They were heavy crude plates glazed white, with an inscription in spidery blue letters: YOU AND I ARE BUT EARTH. Staring at this through a miasma of the bodily fluids of herring for the thirty-fifth consecutive day, Daniel suddenly announced, 'I was thinking that I might go and, God willing, visit John Wilkins.' Wilkins had been exchanging letters with Daniel ever since the debacle of five years ago, when Daniel had arrived at Trinity College a few moments after Wilkins had been kicked out of it forever. The mention of Wilkins did not trigger a rant, which meant Daniel was as good as there. But there were certain formalities to be gone through: 'To what end?' asked Drake, sounding like a pipe-organ with numerous jammed valves as the words emerged partly from his mouth and partly from his nose. He voiced all questions as if they were pat assertions: To what end being said in the same tones as You and I are but earth . 'My purpose is to learn, Father, but I seem to've learned all I can from the books that are here.' 'And what of the Bible.' An excellent riposte there from Drake. 'There are Bibles everywhere, praise God, but only one Reverend Wilkins.' 'He has been preaching at that Established church in the city, has he not.' 'Indeed. St. Lawrence Jewry.' 'Then why should it be necessary for you to leave.' As the city was a quarter of an hour's walk. 'The Plague, father – I don't believe he has actually set foot in London these last several months.' 'And what of his flock.' Daniel almost fired back, Oh, you mean the Royal Society? which in most other houses would have been a bon mot, but not here. 'They've all run away, too, Father, the ones who aren't dead.' 'High Church folk,' Drake said self-explanatorily. 'Where is Wilkins now.' 'Epsom.' 'He is with Comstock. What can he possibly be thinking.' 'It's no secret that you and Wilkins have come down on opposite sides of the fence, Father.' 'The golden fence that Laud threw up around the Lord's Table! Yes.' 'Wilkins backs Tolerance as fervently as you. He hopes to reform the church from within.' 'Yes, and no man – short of an Archbishop – could be more within than John Comstock, the Earl of Epsom. But why should you embroil yourself in such matters.' 'Wilkins is not pursuing religious controversies at Epsom – he is pursuing natural philosophy.' 'Seems a strange place for it.' 'The Earl's son, Charles, could not attend Cambridge because of the plague, and so Wilkins and some other members of the Royal Society are there to serve as his tutors.' 'Aha! It is all clear, then. It is all an accommodation. ' 'Yes.' 'What is it that you hope to learn from the Reverend Wilkins.' 'Whatever it is that he wishes to teach me. Through the Royal Society he is in communication with all the foremost natural philosophers of the British Isles, and many on the Continent as well.' Drake took some time considering that. 'You are asserting that you require my financial assistance in order to become acquainted with a hypothetical body of knowledge which you assume has come into existence out of nowhere , quite recently.' 'Yes, Father.' 'A bit of an act of faith then, isn't it.' 'Not so much as you might think. My friend Isaac – I've told you of him – has spoken of a ‘generative spirit' that pervades all things, and that accounts for the possibility of new things being created from old – and if you don't believe me, then just ask yourself, how can flowers grow up out of manure? Why does meat turn itself into maggots, and ships' planking into worms? Why do images of sea-shells form in rocks far from any sea, and why do new stones grow in farmers' fields after the previous year's crop has been dug out? Clearly some organizing principle is at work, and it pervades all things invisibly, and accounts for the world's ability to have newness:to do something other than only decay.' 'And yet it decays. Look out the window! Listen to the ringing of the bells. Ten years ago, Cromwell melted down the Crown Jewels and gave all men freedom of religion. Today, a crypto-Papist*and lackey of the Antichrist*rules England, and England's gold goes to making giant punch-bowls for use at the royal orgies, and we of the Gathered Church must worship in secret as if we were early Christians in pagan Rome.' 'One of the things about the generative spirit that demands our careful study is that it can go awry,' Daniel returned. 'In some sense the pneuma that causes buboes to grow from the living flesh of plague victims must be akin to the one that causes mushrooms to pop out of the ground after rain, but one has effects we call evil and the other has effects we call good.' 'You think Wilkins knows more of this.' 'I was actually using it to explain the very existence of men like Wilkins, and of this club of his, which he now calls the Royal Society, and of other such groups, such as Monsieur de Montmor's salon in Paris – ' 'I see. You suppose that this same spirit is at work in the minds of these natural philosophers.' 'Yes, Father, and in the very soil of the nations that have produced so many natural philosophers in such a short time – to the great discomfiture of the Papists.' Reckoning it could not hurt his chances to get in a dig at Popery. 'And just as the farmer can rely on the steady increase of his crops, I can be sure that much new work has been accomplished by such people within the last several months.' 'But with the End of Days drawing so near – ' 'Only a few months ago, at one of the last meetings of the Royal Society, Mr. Daniel Coxe said that mercury had been found running like water in a chalk-pit at Line. And Lord Brereton said that at an Inn in St. Alban's, quicksilver was found running in a saw-pit.' 'And you suppose this means – what.' 'Perhaps this flourishing of so many kinds – natural philosophy, plague, the power of King Louis, orgies at Whitehall, quicksilver welling up from the bowels of the earth – is a necessary preparation for the Apocalypse – the generative spirit rising up like a tide.' 'That much is obvious, Daniel. I wonder, though, whether there is any point in furthering your studies when we are so close.' 'Would you admire a farmer who let his fields be overrun with weeds, simply because the End was near?' 'No, of course not. Your point is well taken.' 'If we have a duty to be alert for the signs of the End Times, then let me go, Father. For if the signs are comets, then the first to know will be the astronomers. If the signs are plague, the first to know – ' “ – will be physicians. Yes, I understand. But are you suggesting that those who study natural philosophy can acquire some kind of occult knowledge – special insight into God's Creation, not available to the common Bible-reading man?' 'Er . . . I suppose that's quite clearly what I'm suggesting.' Drake nodded. 'That is what I thought. Well, God gave us brains for a reason – notto use those brains would be a sin.' He got up and carried his plate to the kitchen, then went to a small desk of many drawers in the parlor and broke out all of the gear needed to write on paper with a quill. 'Haven't much coin just now,' he mumbled, moving the quill about in a sequence of furious scribbles separated by long flowing swoops, like a sword-duel. 'There you are.' Mr. Ham pray pay to the bearer one pound I say £1 – of that money of myne which you have in your hands upon sight of this Bill Drake Waterhouse London 'What is this instrument, Father?' 'Goldsmith's Note. People started doing this about the time you left for Cambridge.' 'Why does it say ‘the bearer'? Why not ‘Daniel Waterhouse'?' 'Well, that's the beauty of it. You could, if you chose, use this to pay a one-pound debt – you'd simply hand it to your creditor and he could then nip down to Ham's and get a pound in coin of the realm. Or he could use it to pay one of his debts.' 'I see. But in this case it simply means that if I go into the City and present this to Uncle Thomas, or one of the other Hams . . .' 'They'll do what the note orders them to do.' It was, then, a normal example of Drake's innate fiendishness. Daniel was perfectly welcome to flee to Epsom – the seat of John Comstock, the arch-Anglican – and study Natural Philosophy until, literally, the End of the World. But in order to obtain the means , he would have to demonstrate his faith by walking all the way across London at the height of the Plague. Trial by ordeal it was. The next morning: on with a coat and a down-at-heels pair of riding-boots, even though it was a warm summer day. A scarf to breathe through.*A minimal supply of clean shirts and drawers (if he was feeling well when he reached Epsom, he'd send for more). A rather small number of books – tiny student octavo volumes of the usual Continental savants, their margins and interlinear spaces now caulked with his notes. A letter he'd received from Wilkins, with an enclosure from one Robert Hooke, during a rare spate of mail last week. All went into a bag, the bag on the end of a staff, and the staff over his shoulder – made him look somewhat Vagabondish, but many people in the city had turned to robbery, as normal sources of employment had been shut down, and there were sound reasons to look impoverished and carry a big stick. Drake, upon Daniel's departure: 'Will you tell old Wilkins that I do not think the less of him for having become an Anglican, as I have the most serene confidence that he has done so in the interest of reforming that church, which as you know has been the steady goal of those of us who are scorned by others as Puritans.' And for Daniel: 'I want that you should take care that the plague should not infect you – not the Black Plague, but the plague of Skepticism so fashionable among Wilkins's crowd. In some ways your soul might be safer in a brothel than among certain Fellows of the Royal Society.' 'It is not skepticism for its own sake, Father. Simply an awareness that we are prone to error, and that it is difficult to view anything impartially.' 'That is fine when you are talking about comets.' 'I'll not discuss religion, then. Good-bye, Father.' 'God be with you, Daniel.' HE OPENED THE DOOR , trying not to flinch when outside air touched his face, and descended the steps to the road called Holborn, a river of pounded dust (it had not rained in a while). Drake's house was a new (post-Cromwell) half-timbered building on the north side of the road, one of a line of mostly wooden houses that formed a sort of fence dividing Holborn from the open fields on its north, which stretched all the way to Scotland. The buildings across the way, on the south side of Holborn, were the same but two decades older (pre–Civil War). The ground was flat except for a sort of standing wave of packed dirt that angled across the fields, indeed across Holborn itself, not far away, off to his right – as if a comet had landed on London Bridge and sent up a ripple in the earth, which had spread outwards until it had gone just past Drake's house and then frozen. These were the remains of the earth-works that London*had thrown up early in the Civil War, to defend against the King's armies. There'd been a gate on Holborn and a star-shaped earthen fort nearby, but the gate had been torn down a long time ago and the fort blurred into a grassy hummock guarded by the younger and more adventurous cattle. Daniel turned left, towards London. This was utter madness. But the letter from Wilkins, and the enclosure from Hooke – a Wilkins protégé from his Oxford days, and now Curator of Experiments of the Royal Society – contained certain requests. They were phrased politely. Perhaps not so politely in Hooke's case. They had let Daniel know that he could be of great service to them by fetching certain items out of certain buildings in London. Daniel could have burned the letter and claimed it had never arrived. He could have gone to Epsom without any of the items on the list, pleading the Bubonic Plague as his excuse. But he suspected that Wilkins and Hooke did not care for excuses any more than Drake did. By going to Trinity at exactly the wrong moment, Daniel had missed out on the first five years of the Royal Society of London. Lately he had attended a few meetings, but always felt as if his nose were pressed up against the glass. Today he would pay his dues by walking into London. It was hardly the most dangerous thing anyone had done in the study of Natural Philosophy. He put one boot in front of the other, and found that he had not died yet. He did it again, then again. The place seemed eerily normal for a short while as long as you ignored the continuous ringing of death-knells from about a hundred different parish churches. On a closer look, many people had adorned the walls of their houses with nearly hysterical pleas for God's mercy, perhaps thinking that like the blood of the lambs on Israel's door-posts, these graffiti might keep the Angel of Death from knocking. Wagons came and went on Holborn only occasionally – empty ones going into town, stained and reeking, with vanguards and rear-guards of swooping birds cutting swaths through the banks of flies that surrounded them – these were corpse-wains returning from their midnight runs to the burial-pits and churchyards outside the town. Wagons filled with people, escorted by pedestrians with hand-bells and red sticks, crept out of town. Just near the remains of those earth-works where Holborn terminated at its intersection with the road to Oxford, a pest-house had been established, and when it had filled up with dead people, another, farther away, to the north of the Tyburn gallows, at Marylebone. Some of the people on the wagons appeared normal, others had reached the stage where the least movement caused them hellish buboe-pain, and so even without the bells and red sticks the approach of these wagons would have been obvious from the fusillade of screams and hot prayers touched off at every bump in the road. Daniel and the very few other pedestrians on Holborn backed into doorways and breathed through scarves when these wagons passed by. Through Newgate and the stumps of the Roman wall, then, past the Prison, which was silent, but not empty. Towards the square-topped tower of Saint Paul's, where an immense bell was being walloped by tired ringers, counting the years of the dead. That old tower leaned to one side, and had for a long time, so that everyone in London had stopped noticing that it did. In these circumstances, though, it seemed to lean more, and made Daniel suddenly nervous that it was about to fall over on him. Just a few weeks ago, Robert Hooke and Sir Robert Moray had been up in its belfry conducting experiments with two-hundred-foot-long pendulums. Now the cathedral was fortified within a rampart of freshly tamped earth, the graves piled up a full yard above ground level. The old front of the church had become half eaten away by coal-smoke, and a newfangled Classical porch slapped onto it some three or four decades ago. But the new columns were already decaying, and they were marred from where shops had been built between them during Cromwell's time. During those years, Roundhead cavalry had pulled the furniture up from the western half of the church and chopped it up for firewood, then used the empty space as a vast stable for nearly a thousand horses, selling their dung as fuel, to freezing Londoners, for 4d a bushel. Meanwhile, in the eastern half Drake and Bolstrood and others had preached three-hour sermons to diminishing crowds. Now King Charles was supposedly fixing the place up, but Daniel could see no evidence that anything had been done. Daniel went round the south side of the church even though it was not the most direct way, because he wanted to have a look at the south transept, which had collapsed some years ago. Rumor had it that the bigger and better stones were being carted away and used to build a new wing of John Comstock's house on Piccadilly. Indeed, many of the stones had been removed to somewhere, but of course no one was working there now except for gravediggers. Into Cheapside, where men on ladders were clambering into upper-story windows of a boarded-up house to remove limp, exhausted children who'd somehow outlived their families. Down in the direction of the river, the only gathering of people Daniel had seen: a long queue before the house of Dr. Nathaniel Hodges, one of the only physicians who hadn't fled. Not far beyond that, on Cheapside, the house of John Wilkins himself. Wilkins had sent Daniel a key, which turned out not to be necessary, as his house had already been broken into. Floorboards pried up, mattresses gutted so that the place looked like a barn for all the loose straw and lumber on the floor. Whole ranks of books pawed from the shelves to see if anything was hidden behind. Daniel went round and re-shelved the books, holding back two or three newish ones that Wilkins had asked him to fetch. Then to the Church of St. Lawrence Jewry.*“Follow the Drainpipes, find the Amphib'ns ,' Wilkins had written. Daniel walked round the churchyard, which was studded with graves, but had not reached the graves-on-top-of-graves stage – Wilkins's parishioners were mostly prosperous mercers who'd fled to their country houses. At one corner of the roof, a red copper vein descended from the downhill end of a rain-gutter, then ducked into a holed window beneath. Daniel entered the church and traced it down into a cellar where dormant God-gear was cached to expect the steady wheeling of the liturgical calendar (Easter and Christmas stuff, e.g.) or sudden reversals in the prevailing theology (High Church people like the late Bishop Laud wanted a fence round the altar so parish dogs couldn't lift their legs on the Lord's Table, Low Church primitives like Drake didn't; the Rev. Wilkins, more in the Drake mold, had stashed the fence and rail down here). This room hummed, almost shuddered, as if a choir of monks were lurking in the corners intoning one of their chants, but it was actually the buzzing of a whole civilization of flies, so large that many of them seemed to be singing bass – these had grown from the corpses of rats, which carpeted the cellar floor like autumn leaves. It smelled that way, too. The drain-pipe came into the cellar from a hole in the floor above, and emptied into a stone baptismal Font – a jumbo, total-baby-immersion style of Font – that had been shoved into a corner, probably around the time that King Henry VIII had kicked out the Papists. Daniel guessed as much from the carvings, which were so thick with symbols of Rome that to remove them all would have destroyed it structurally. When this vessel filled with rain-water from the drain-pipe it would spill excess onto the floor, and it would meander off into a corner and seep into the earth – perhaps this source of drinking-water had attracted the sick rats. In any case the top of the font was covered with a grille held down by a couple of bricks – from underneath came contented croaking sounds. A gout of pink shot through an interstice and speared a fly out of midair, paused humming-taut for an instant, then snapped back. Daniel removed the bricks and pulled up the grille and looked at, and was looked at by, half a dozen of the healthiest frogs he'd ever seen, frogs the size of terriers, frogs that could tongue sparrows out of the air. Standing there in the City of Death, Daniel laughed. The generative spirit ran amok in the bodies of rats, whose corpses were transmuted into flies, which gave up their spirit to produce happy blinking green frogs. Faint ticks, by the thousands, merged into a sound like wind-driven sleet against a windowpane. Daniel looked down to see it was just hordes of fleas who had abandoned the rat corpses and converged on him from all across the cellar, and were now ricocheting off his leather boots. He rummaged until he found a bread-basket, packed the frogs into it, imprisoned them loosely under a cloth, and walked out of there. Though he could not see the river from here, he could infer that the tide was receding from the trickle of Thames-water that was beginning to probe its way down the gutter in the middle of Poultry Lane, running downhill from Leadenhall. Normally this would be a slurry of paper-scraps discarded by traders at the ‘Change, but today it was lumpy with corpses of rats and cats. He gave that gutter as wide a berth as he could, but proceeded up against the direction of its flow to the edge of the goldsmiths' district, whence Threadneedle and Poultry and Lombard and Cornhill sprayed confusingly. He continued up Cornhill to the highest point in the City of London, where Cornhill came together with Leadenhall (which carried on eastwards, but downhill from here) and Fish Street (downhill straight to London Bridge) and Bishopsgate (downhill towards the city wall, and Bedlam, and the plague-pit they'd dug next to it). In the middle of this intersection a stand-pipe sprouted, with one nozzle for each of those streets, and Thames-water rushed from each nozzle to flush the gutters. It was connected to a buried pipe that ran underneath Fish Street to the northern terminus of London Bridge. During Elizabeth's time some clever Dutchmen had built water-wheels there. Even when the men who tended them were dead or run away to the country, these spun powerfully whenever the tide went out and high water accumulated on the upstream side of the bridge. They were connected to pumps that pressurized the Fish Street pipe and (if you lived on this hill) carried away the accumulated waste, or (if you lived elsewhere) brought a twice-daily onslaught of litter, turds, and dead animals. He followed said onslaught down Bishopsgate, watching the water get dirtier as he went, but didn't go as far as the wall – he stopped at the great house, or rather compound, that Sir Thomas (“Bad money drives out good') Gresham had built, a hundred years ago, with money he'd made lending to the Crown and reforming the coinage. Like all old half-timbered fabricks it was slowly warping and bending out of true, but Daniel loved it because it was now Gresham's College, home of the Royal Society. And of Robert Hooke, the R.S.'s Curator of Experiments, who'd moved into it nine months ago – enabling him to do experiments all the time. Hooke had sent Daniel a list of odds and ends that he needed for his work at Epsom. Daniel deposited his frog-basket and other goods on the high table in the room where the Royal Society had its meetings and, using that as a sort of base-camp, made excursions into Hooke's apartment and all of the rooms and attics and cellars that the Royal Society had taken over for storage. He saw, and rummaged through, and clambered over, slices of numerous tree-trunks that someone had gathered in a bid to demonstrate that the thin parts of the rings tended to point towards true north. A Brazilian compass-fish that Boyle had suspended from a thread to see if (as legend had it) it would do the same (when Daniel came in, it was pointing south by southeast). Jars containing: powder of the lungs and livers of vipers (someone thought you could produce young vipers from it), something called Sympathetic Powder that supposedly healed wounds through a voodoo-like process. Samples of a mysterious red fluid taken from the Bloody Pond at Newington. Betel-nut, camphire-wood, nux vomica, rhino-horn. A ball of hair that Sir William Curtius had found in a cow's belly. Some experiments in progress: a number of pebbles contained in glass jars full of water, the necks of the jars just barely large enough to let the pebbles in; later they would see if the pebbles could be removed, and if not, it would prove that they had grown in the water. Very large amounts of splintered lumber of all types, domestic and foreign – the residue of the Royal Society's endless experiments on the breaking-strength of wooden beams. The Earl of Balcarres's heart, which he had thoughtfully donated to them, but not until he had died of natural causes. A box of stones that various people had coughed up out of their lungs, which the R.S. was saving up to send as a present to the King. Hundreds of wasps' and birds' nests, methodically labeled with the names of the proud patrons who had brought them in. A box of baby vertebrae which had been removed from a large abscess in the side of a woman who'd had a failed pregnancy twelve years earlier. Stored in jars in spirits of wine: various human fœtuses, the head of a colt with a double eye in the center of its forehead, an eel from Japan. Tacked to the wall: the skin of a seven-legged, two-bodied, single-headed lamb. Decomposing in glass boxes: the Royal Society's viper collection, all dead of starvation; some had their heads tied to their tails as part of some sort of Uroburos experiment. More hairballs. The heart of an executed person, superficially no different from that of the Earl of Balcarres. A vial containing seeds that had supposedly been voided in the urine of a maid in Holland. A jar of blue pigment made from tincture of galls, a jar of green made from Hungarian vitriol. A sketch of one of the Dwarves who supposedly inhabited the Canary Islands. Hundreds of lodestones of various sizes and shapes. A model of a giant crossbow that Hooke had designed for flinging harpoons at whales. A U-shaped glass tube that Boyle had filled with quicksilver to prove that its undulations were akin to those of a pendulum. Hooke wanted Daniel to bring various parts and tools and materials used in the making of watches and other fine mechanisms; some of the stones that had been found in the Earl's heart; a cylinder of quicksilver; a hygroscope made from the beard of a wild oat; a burning-glass in a wooden frame; a pair of deep convex spectacles for seeing underwater; his dew-collecting glass,*and selections from his large collection of preserved bladders: carp, pig, cow, and so on. He also wanted enormous, completely impractical numbers of different-sized spheres of different materials such as lead, amber, wood, silver, and so forth, which were useful in all manner of rolling and dropping experiments. Also, various spare parts for his air-compressing engine, and his Artificial Eye. Finally, Hooke asked him to collect 'any puppies, kittens, chicks, or mice you might come across, as the supply hereabouts is considerably diminished.' Some mail had piled up here, despite the recent difficulties, much of it addressed simply 'GRUBENDOL London.' Following Wilkins's instructions, Daniel gathered it all up and added it to the pile. But the GRUBENDOL stuff he culled out, and tied up into a packet with string. Now he was ready to leave London, and wanted only money, and some way to carry all of this stuff. Back down Bishopsgate he went (leaving everything behind at Gresham College, except for the frogs, who demanded close watching) and turned on Threadneedle, which he followed westwards as it converged on Cornhill. Close to their intersection stood a series of row-houses that fronted on both of these streets. As even the illiterate might guess from the men with muskets smoking pipes on the rooftops, all were goldsmiths. Daniel went to the one called HAM BROS. A few trinkets and a couple of gold plates were displayed in a window by the door, as if to suggest that the Hams were still literally in the business of fabricating things out of gold. A face in a grate. 'Daniel!' The grate slammed and latched, the door growled and clanged as might works of ironmongery were slid and shot on the inside. Finally it was open. 'Welcome!' 'Good day, Uncle Thomas.' 'Half-brother-in-law actually,' said Thomas Ham, out of a stubborn belief that pedantry and repetitiveness could through some alchemy be forged into wit. Pedantry because he was technically correct (he'd married Daniel's half-sister) and repetitive because he'd been making the same joke for as long as Daniel had been alive. Ham was more than sixty years old now, and he was one of those who is fat and skinny at the same time – a startling pot-belly suspended from a lanky armature, waggling jowls draped over a face like an edged weapon. He had been lucky to capture the fair Mayflower Waterhouse, or so he was encouraged to believe. 'I was affrighted when I came up the street – thought you were burying people,' Daniel said, gesturing at several mounds of earth around the house's foundations. Ham looked carefully up and down Threadneedle – as if what he was doing could possibly be a secret from anyone. 'We are making a Crypt of a different sort,' he said. 'Come, enter. Why is that basket croaking?' 'I have taken a job as a porter,' Daniel said. 'Do you have a hand-cart or wheelbarrow I could borrow for a few days?' 'Yes, a very heavy and strong one – we use it to carry lock-boxes back and forth to the Mint. Hasn't moved since the Plague started. By all means take it!' The parlor held a few more pathetic vestiges of a retail jewelry business, but it was really just a large writing-desk and some books. Stairs led to the Ham residence on the upper floors – dark and silent. 'Mayflower and the children are well in Buckinghamshire?' Daniel asked. 'God willing, yes, her last letter quite put me to sleep. Come downstairs!' Uncle Thomas led him through another fortress-door that had been left wedged open, and down a narrow stair into the earth – for the first time since leaving his father's house, Daniel smelled nothing bad, only the calm scent of earth being disturbed. He'd never been invited into the cellar, but he'd always known about it – from the solemn way it was talked about, or, to be precise, talked around, he'd always known it must be full of either ghosts or a large quantity of gold. Now he found it to be absurdly small and homely compared to its awesome reputation, in a way that was heartwarmingly English – but it was full of gold, and it was getting larger and less ditch-like by the minute. At the end nearest the base of the stairway, piled simply on the dirt floor, were platters, punch-bowls, pitchers, knives, forks, spoons, goblets, ladles, candlesticks, and gravy-boats of gold – also sacks of coins, boxed medallions stamped with visages of Continental nobles commemorating this or that battle, actual gold bars, and irregular sticks of gold called pigs. Each item was somehow tagged: 367-11/32 troy oz. depos. by my Lord Rochester on 29 Sept. 1662 and so on. The stuff was piled up like a drystone wall, which is to say that bits were packed into spaces between other bits in a way calculated to keep the whole formation from collapsing. All of it was spattered with dirt and brick-fragments and mortar-splats from the work proceeding at the other end of the cellar: a laborer with pick and shovel, and another with a back-basket to carry the dirt upstairs; a carpenter working with heavy timbers, doing something Daniel assumed was to keep the House of Ham from collapsing; and a bricklayer and his assistant, giving the new space a foundation and walls. It was a tidy cellar now; no rats in here. 'Your late mother's candlesticks are, I'm afraid, not on view just now – rather far back in the, er, Arrangement – ' said Thomas Ham. 'I'm not here to disturb the Arrangement,' Daniel said, producing the Note from his father. 'Oh! Easily done! Easily and cheerfully done!' announced Mr. Ham after donning spectacles and shaking his jowls at the Note for a while, a hound casting after a scent. 'Pocket money for the young scholar – the young divine – is it?' 'Cambridge is very far from re-opening, they say – need to be applying myself elsewhere,' Daniel said, merely dribbling small talk behind him as he went to look at a small pile of dirty stuff that was not gold. 'What are these?' 'Remains of the house of some Roman that once stood here,' Mr. Ham said. 'Those who follow these things – and I'm sorry to say I don't – assure me that something called Walbrook Stream flowed just through here, and spilled into the Thames at the Provincial Governor's Palace, twelve hundred odd years ago – the Roman mercers had their houses along its banks, so that they could ferry goods up and down from the River.' Daniel was using the sole of one boot to sweep loose dirt away from a hard surface he'd sensed underneath. Wee polygons – terra-cotta, indigo, bone-white, beige – appeared. He was looking at a snatch of a mosaic floor. He swept away more dirt and recognized it as a rendering of a naked leg, knee flexed and toe pointed as if its owner were on the run. A pair of wings sprouted from the ankle. 'Yes, the Roman floor we'll keep,' said Mr. Ham, 'as we need a barrier – to discourage clever men with shovels. Jonas, where are the loose bits?' The digger kicked a wooden box across the floor towards them. It was half-full of small bits of dirty junk: a couple of combs carved out of bone or ivory; a clay lantern; the skeleton of a brooch, jewels long since missing from their sockets; fragments of glazed pottery; and something long and slender: a hairpin, Daniel reckoned, rubbing the dirt away. It was probably silver, though badly tarnished. 'Take it, my lad,' said Mr. Ham, referring not only to the hairpin but also to a rather nice silver one-pound coin that he had just quarried from his pocket. 'Perhaps the future Mrs. Waterhouse will enjoy fixing her coif with a bauble that once adorned the head of some Roman trader's wife.' 'Trinity College does not allow us to have wives,' Daniel reminded him, 'but I'll take it anyway – perhaps I'll have a niece or something who has pretty hair, and who isn't squeamish about a bit of paganism.' For it was clear now that the hairpin was fashioned in the shape of a caduceus. 'Paganism? Then we are all pagans! It is a symbol of Mercury – patron of commerce – who has been worshipped in this cellar – and in this city – for a thousand years, by Bishops as well as business-men. It is a cult that adapts itself to any religion, just as easily as quicksilver adopts the shape of any container – and someday, Daniel, you'll meet a young lady who is just as adaptable. Take it.' Putting the silver coin next to the caduceus in Daniel's palm, he folded Daniel's fingers over the top and then clasped the fist – chilled by the touch of the metal – between his two warm hands in benediction. DANIEL PUSHED HIS HAND-CART westwards down Cheapside. He held his breath as he hurried around the reeking tumulus that surrounded St. Paul's, and did not breathe easy again until he'd passed out of Ludgate. The passage over Fleet Ditch was even worse, because it was strewn with bodies of rats, cats, and dogs, as well as quite a few plague-corpses that had simply been rolled out of wagons, and not even dignified with a bit of dirt. He kept a rag clamped over his face, and did not take it off until he had passed out through Temple Bar and gone by the little Watch-house that stood in the middle of the Strand in front of Somerset House. From there he could glimpse green fields and open country between certain of the buildings, and smell whiffs of manure on the breeze, which smelled delightful compared to London. He had worried that the wheels of his cart would bog down in Charing Cross, which was a perpetual morass, but summer heat, and want of traffic, had quite dried the place up. A pack of five stray dogs watched him make his way across the expanse of rutted and baked dirt. He was worried that they would come after him until he noticed that they were uncommonly fat, for stray dogs. Oldenburg lived in a town-house on Pall Mall. Except for a heroic physician or two, he was the only member of the R.S. who'd stayed in town during the Plague. Daniel took out the GRUBENDOL packet and put it on the doorstep – letters from Vienna, Florence, Paris, Amsterdam, Berlin, Moscow. He knocked thrice on the door, and backed away to see a round face peering down at him through obscuring layers of green window-glass, like a curtain of tears. Oldenburg's wife had lately died – not of Plague – and some supposed that he stayed in London hoping that the Black Death would carry him off to wherever she was. On his long walk out of town, Daniel had plenty of time to work out that GRUBENDOL was an anagram for Oldenburg. Epsom 1665–1666 By this it appears how necessary it is for any man that aspires to true knowledge, to examine the definitions of former authors; and either to correct them, where they are negligently set down, or to make them himself. For the errors of definitions multiply themselves according as the reckoning proceeds, and lead men into absurdities, which at last they see, but cannot avoid, without reckoning anew from the beginning. – HOBBES, Leviathan JOHN COMSTOCK'S SEAT was at Epsom, a short journey from London. It was large. That largeness came in handy during the Plague, because it enabled his Lordship to stable a few Fellows of the Royal Society (which would enhance his already tremendous prestige) without having to be very close to them (which would disturb his household, and place his domestic animals in extreme peril). All of this was obvious enough to Daniel as one of Comstock's servants met him at the gate and steered him well clear of the manor house and across a sort of defensive buffer zone of gardens and pastures to a remote cottage with an oddly dingy and crowded look to it. To one side lay a spacious bone-yard, chalky with skulls of dogs, cats, rats, pigs, and horses. To the other, a pond cluttered with the wrecks of model ships, curiously rigged. Above the well, some sort of pulley arrangement, and a rope extending from the pulley, across a pasture, to a half-assembled chariot. On the roof of the cottage, diverse small windmills of outlandish design – one of them mounted over the mouth of the cottage's chimney and turned by the rising of its smoke. Every high tree-limb in the vicinity had been exploited as a support for pendulums, and the pendulum-strings had all gotten twisted round each other by winds, and merged into a tattered philosophickal cobweb. The green space in front was a mechanical phant'sy of wheels and gears, broken or never finished. There was a giant wheel, apparently built so that a man could roll across the countryside by climbing inside it and driving it forward with his feet. Ladders had been leaned against any wall or tree with the least ability to push back. Halfway up one of the ladders was a stout, fair-haired man who was not far from the end of his natural life span – though he apparently did not entertain any ambitions of actually reaching it. He was climbing the ladder one-handed in hard-soled leather shoes that were perfectly frictionless on the rungs, and as he swayed back and forth, planting one foot and then the next, the ladder's feet, down below him, tiptoed backwards. Daniel rushed over and braced the ladder, then forced himself to look upwards at the shuddering battle-gammoned form of the Rev. Wilkins. The Rev. was carrying, in his free hand, some sort of winged object. And speaking of winged objects, Daniel now felt himself being tickled, and glanced down to find half a dozen honeybees had alighted on each one of his hands. As Daniel watched in empirical horror, one of them drove its stinger into the fleshy place between his thumb and index finger. He bit his lip and looked up to see whether letting go the ladder would lead to the immediate death of Wilkins. The answer: yes. Bees were now swarming all round – nuzzling the fringes of Daniel's hair, playing crack-the-whip through the ladder's rungs, and orbiting round Wilkins's body in a humming cloud. Reaching the highest possible altitude – flagrantly tempting the LORD to strike him dead – Wilkins released the toy in his hand. Whirring and clicking noises indicated that some sort of spring-driven clockwork had gone into action – there was fluttering, and skidding through the air – some sort of interaction with the atmosphere, anyway, that went beyond mere falling – but fall it did, veering into the cottage's stone wall and spraying parts over the yard. 'Never going to fly to the moon that way,' Wilkins grumbled. 'I thought you wanted to be shot out of a cannon to the Moon.' Wilkins whacked himself on the stomach. 'As you can see, I have far too much vis inertiae to be shot out of anything to anywhere. Before I come down there, are you feeling well, young man? No sweats, chills, swellings?' 'I anticipated your curiosity on that subject, Dr. Wilkins, and so the frogs and I lodged at an inn in Epsom for two nights. I have never felt healthier.' 'Splendid! Mr. Hooke has denuded the countryside of small animals – if you hadn't brought him anything, he'd have cut you up.' Wilkins was coming down the ladder, the sureness of each footfall very much in doubt, massy buttocks approaching Daniel as a spectre of doom. Finally on terra firma, he waved a hundred bees off with an intrepid sweep of the arm. They wiped bees away from their palms, then exchanged a long, warm handshake. The bees were collectively losing interest and seeping away in the direction of a large glinting glass box. 'It is Wren's design, come and see!' Wilkins said, bumbling after them. The glass structure was a model of a building, complete with a blown dome, and pillars carved of crystal. It was of a Gothickal design, and had the general look of some Government office in London, or a University college. The doors and windows were open to let bees fly in and out. They had built a hive inside – a cathedral of honeycombs. 'With all respect to Mr. Wren, I see a clash of architectural styles here – ' 'What! Where?' Wilkins exclaimed, searching the roofline for aesthetic contaminants. 'I shall cane the boy!' 'It's not the builder, but the tenants who're responsible. All those little waxy hexagons – doesn't fit with Mr. Wren's scheme, does it?' 'Which style do you prefer?' Wilkins asked, wickedly. 'Err – ' 'Before you answer, know that Mr. Hooke approaches,' the Rev. whispered, glancing sidelong. Daniel looked over toward the house to see Hooke coming their way, bent and gray and transparent, like one of those curious figments that occasionally floats across one's eyeball. 'Is he all right?' Daniel asked. 'The usual bouts of melancholy – a certain peevishness over the scarcity of adventuresome females – ' 'I meant is he sick.' Hooke had stopped near Daniel's luggage, attracted by the croaking of frogs. He stepped in and seized the basket. 'Oh, he ever looks as if he's been bleeding to death for several hours – fear for the frogs, not for Hooke!' Wilkins said. He had a perpetual knowing, amused look that enabled him to get away with saying almost anything. This, combined with the occasional tactical master-stroke (e.g., marrying Cromwell's sister during the Interregnum), probably accounted for his ability to ride out civil wars and revolutions as if they were mere theatrical performances. He bent down in front of the glass apiary, pantomiming a bad back; reached underneath; and, after some dramatic rummaging, drew out a glass jar with an inch or so of cloudy brown honey in the bottom. 'Mr. Wren provided sewerage, as you can see,' he said, giving the jar to Daniel. It was blood-warm. The Rev. now headed in the direction of the house, and Daniel followed. 'You say you quarantined yourself at Epsom town – you must have paid for lodgings there – that means you have pocket-money. Drake must've given it you. What on earth did you tell him you were coming here to do? I need to know,' Wilkins added apologetically, 'only so that I can write him the occasional letter claiming that you are doing it.' 'Keeping abreast of the very latest, from the Continent or whatever. I'm to provide him with advance warning of any events that are plainly part of the Apocalypse.' Wilkins stroked an invisible beard and nodded profoundly, standing back so that Daniel could dart forward and haul open the cottage door. They went into the front room, where a fire was decaying in a vast hearth. Two or three rooms away, Hooke was crucifying a frog on a plank, occasionally swearing as he struck his thumb. 'Perhaps you can help me with my book . . .' 'A new edition of the Cryptonomicon ?' 'Perish the thought! Damn me, I'd almost forgotten about that old thing. Wrote it a quarter-century ago. Consider the times! The King was losing his mind – his Ministers being lynched in Parliament – his own drawbridge-keepers locking him out of his own arsenals. His foes intercepting letters abroad, written by that French Papist wife of his, begging foreign powers to invade us. Hugh Peters had come back from Salem to whip those Puritans into a frenzy – no great difficulty, given that the King, simply out – out – of money, had seized all of the merchants' gold in the Tower. Scottish Covenanters down as far as Newcastle, Catholics rebelling in Ulster, sudden panics in London – gentlemen on the street whipping out their rapiers for little or no reason. Things no better elsewhere – Europe twenty-five years into the Thirty Years' War, wolves eating children along the road in Besançon, for Christ's sake – Spain and Portugal dividing into two separate kingdoms, the Dutch taking advantage of it to steal Malacca from the Portuguese – of course I wrote the Cryptonomicon ! And of course people bought it! But if it was the Omega – a way of hiding information, of making the light into darkness – then the Universal Character is the Alpha – an opening. A dawn. A candle in the darkness. Am I being disgusting?' 'Is this anything like Comenius's project?' Wilkins leaned across and made as if to box Daniel's ears. 'It is his project! This was what he and I, and that whole gang of odd Germans – Hartlib, Haak, Kinner, Oldenburg – wanted to do when we conceived the Invisible College*back in the Dark Ages. But Mr. Comenius's work was burned up in a fire, back in Moravia, you know.' 'Accidental, or – ' ' Excellentquestion, young man – in Moravia, one never knows. Now, if Comenius had listened to my advice and accepted the invitation to be Master of Harvard College back in '41, it might've been different – ' 'The colonists would be twenty-five years ahead of us!' 'Just so. Instead, Natural Philosophy flourishes at Oxford – less so at Cambridge – and Harvard is a pitiable backwater.' 'Why didn't he take your advice, I wonder – ?' 'The tragedy of these middle-European savants is that they are always trying to apply their philosophick acumen in the political realm.' 'Whereas the Royal Society is – ?' ' Ever so strictlyapolitical,' Wilkins said, and then favored Daniel with a stage-actor's hugely exaggerated wink. 'If we stayed away from politics, we could be flying winged chariots to the Moon within a few generations. All that's needed is to pull down certain barriers to progress – ' 'Such as?' 'Latin.' ' Latin!?But Latin is – ' 'I know, the universal language of scholars and divines, et cetera, et cetera.And it sounds so lovely, doesn't it. You can say any sort of nonsense in Latin and our feeble University men will be stunned, or at least profoundly confused. That's how the Popes have gotten away with peddling bad religion for so long – they simply say it in Latin. But if we were to unfold their convoluted phrases and translate them into a philosophical language, all of their contradictions and vagueness would become manifest.' 'Mmm . . . I'd go so far as to say that if a proper philosophical language existed, it would be impossible to express any false concept in it without violating its rules of grammar,' Daniel hazarded. 'You have just uttered the most succinct possible definition of it – I say, you're not competing with me, are you?' Wilkins said jovially. 'No,' Daniel said, too intimidated to catch the humor. 'I was merely reasoning by analogy to Cartesian analysis, where false statements cannot legally be written down, as long as the terms are understood.' 'The terms! That's the difficult part,' Wilkins said. 'As a way to write down the terms, I am developing the Philosophical Language and the Universal Character – which learned men of all races and nations will use to signify ideas.' 'I am at your service, sir,' Daniel said. 'When may I begin?' 'Immediately! Before Hooke's done with those frogs – if he comes in here and finds you idle, he'll enslave you – you'll be shovelling guts or, worse, trying the precision of his clocks by standing before a pendulum and counting . . . its . . . alternations . . . all . . . day . . . long.' Hooke came in. His spine was all awry: not only stooped, but bent to one side. His long brown hair hung unkempt around his face. He straightened up a bit and tilted his head back so that the hair fell away to either side, like a curtain opening up to reveal a pale face. Stubble on the cheeks made him look even gaunter than he actually was, and made his gray eyes look even more huge. He said: 'Frogs, too.' 'Nothing surprises me now , Mr. Hooke.' 'I put it to you that all living creatures are made out of them.' 'Have you considered writing any of this down? Mr. Hooke? Mr. Hooke?' But Hooke was already gone out into the stable-yard, off on some other experiment. 'Made out of what ??' Daniel asked. 'Lately, every time Mr. Hooke peers at something with his Microscope he finds that it is divided up into small compartments, each one just like its neighbors, like bricks in a wall,' Wilkins confided. 'What do these bricks look like?' 'He doesn't call them bricks. Remember, they are hollow. He has taken to calling them ‘cells' . . . but you don't want to get caught up in all that nonsense. Follow me, my dear Daniel. Put thoughts of cells out of your mind. To understand the Philosophical Language you must know that all things in Earth and Heaven can be classified into forty different genera . . . within each of those, there are, of course, further subclasses.' Wilkins showed him into a servant's room where a writing desk had been set up, and papers and books mounded up with as little concern for order as the bees had shown in building their honeycomb. Wilkins moved a lot of air, and so leaves of paper flew off of stacks as he passed through the room. Daniel picked one up and read it: 'Mule fern, panic-grass, hartstongue, adderstongue, moonwort, sea novelwort, wrack, Job's-tears, broomrope, toothwort, scurvy-grass, sowbread, golden saxifrage, lily of the valley, bastard madder, stinking ground-pine, endive, dandelion, sowthistle, Spanish picktooth, purple loose-strife, bitter vetch.' Wilkins was nodding impatiently. 'The capsulate herbs, not campanulate, and the bacciferous sempervirent shrubs,' he said. 'Somehow it must have gotten mixed up with the glandiferous and the nuciferous trees.' 'So, the Philosophical Language is some sort of botanical – ' 'Look at me, I'm shuddering. Shuddering at the thought. Botany! Please, Daniel, try to collect your wits. In this stack we have all of the animals, from the belly-worm to the tyger. Here, the terms of Euclidean geometry, relating to time, space, and juxtaposition. There, a classification of diseases: pustules, boils, wens, and scabs on up to splenetic hypochondriacal vapours, iliac passion, and suffocation.' 'Is suffocation a disease?' 'Excellent question – get to work and answer it!' Wilkins thundered. Daniel, meanwhile, had rescued another sheet from the floor: 'Yard, Johnson, dick . . .' 'Synonyms for ‘penis,' ' Wilkins said impatiently. 'Rogue, mendicant, shake-rag . . .' 'Synonyms for ‘beggar.' In the Philosophical Language there will only be one word for penises, one for beggars. Quick, Daniel, is there a distinction between groaning and grumbling?' 'I should say so, but – ' 'On the other hand – may we lump genuflection together with curtseying, and give them one name?' 'I – I cannot say, Doctor!' 'Then, I say, there is work to be done! At the moment, I am bogged down in an endless digression on the Ark.' 'Of the Covenant? Or – ' 'The other one.' 'How does that enter into the Philosophical Language?' 'Obviously the P.L. must contain one and only one word for every type of animal. Each animal's word must reflect its classification – that is, the words for perch and bream should be noticeably similar, as should the words for robin and thrush. But bird-words should be quite different from fish-words.' 'It strikes me as, er, ambitious . . .' 'Half of Oxford is sending me tedious lists. My – our – task is to organize them – to draw up a table of every type of bird and beast in the world. I have entabulated the animals troublesome to other animals – the louse, the flea. Those designed for further transmutation – the caterpillar, the maggot. One-horned sheathed winged insects. Testaceous turbinated exanguious animals – and before you ask, I have subdivided them into those with, and without, spiral convolutions. Squamous river fish, phytivorous birds of long wings, rapacious beasts of the cat-kind – anyway, as I drew up all of these lists and tables, it occurred to me that (going back to Genesis, sixth chapter, verses fifteen through twenty-two) Noah must have found a way to fit all of these creatures into one gopher-wood tub three hundred cubits long! I became concerned that certain Continental savants, of an atheistical bent, might misuse my list to suggest that the events related in Genesis could not have happened – ' 'One could also imagine certain Jesuits turning it against you – holding it up as proof that you harbored atheistical notions of your own, Dr. Wilkins.' 'Just so! Daniel! Which makes it imperative that I include, in a separate chapter, a complete plan of Noah's Ark – demonstrating not only where each of the beasts was berthed, but also the fodder for the herbivorous beasts, and live cattle for the carnivorous ones, and more fodder yet to keep the cattle alive, long enough to be eaten by the carnivores – where, I say, 'twas all stowed.' 'Fresh water must have been wanted, too,' Daniel reflected. Wilkins – who tended to draw closer and closer to people when he was talking to them, until they had to edge backwards – grabbed a sheaf of paper off a stack and bopped Daniel on the head with it. 'Tend to your Bible, foolish young man! It rained the entire time!' 'Of course, of course – they could've drunk rainwater,' Daniel said, profoundly mortified. 'I have had to take some liberties with the definition of ‘cubit,' ' Wilkins said, as if betraying a secret, 'but I think he could have done it with eighteen hundred and twenty-five sheep. To feed the carnivores, I mean.' 'The sheep must've taken up a whole deck!?' 'It's not the space they take up, it's all the manure, and the labor of throwing it overboard,' Wilkins said. 'At any rate – as you can well imagine – this Ark business has stopped all progress cold on the P.L. front. I need you to get on with the Terms of Abuse.' 'Sir!' 'Have you felt, Daniel, a certain annoyance, when one of your semi-educated Londoners speaks of ‘a vile rascal' or ‘a miserable caitiff' or ‘crafty knave,' ‘idle truant,' or ‘flattering parasite'?' 'Depends upon who is calling whom what . . .' 'No, no, no! Let's try an easy one: ‘fornicating whore.' “ 'It is redundant. Hence, annoying to the cultivated listener.' ' ‘Senseless fop.' “ 'Again, redundant – as are ‘flattering parasite' and the others.' 'So, clearly, in the Philosophical Language, we needn't have separate adjectives and nouns in such cases.' 'How about ‘filthy sloven?' 'Excellent! Write it down, Daniel!' ' ‘Licentious blade' . . . ‘facetious wag' . . . ‘perfidious traitor' . . .' As Daniel continued in this vein, Wilkins bustled over to the writing-desk, withdrew a quill from an inkwell, shook off redundant ink, and then came over to Daniel; wrapped his fingers around the pen; and guided him over to the desk. And so to work. Daniel exhausted the Terms of Abuse in a few short hours, then moved on to Virtues (intellectual, moral, and homiletical), Colors, Sounds, Tastes and Smells, Professions, Operations (viz. carpentry, sewing, alchemy), and so on. Days began passing. Wilkins became fretful if Daniel, or anyone, worked too hard, and so there were frequent 'seminars' and 'symposia' in the kitchen – they used honey from Christopher Wren's Gothic apiary to make flip. Frequently Charles Comstock, the fifteen-year-old son of their noble host, came to visit, and to hear Wilkins or Hooke talk. Charles tended to bring with him letters addressed to the Royal Society from Huygens, Leeuwenhoek, Swammerdam, Spinoza. Frequently these turned out to contain new concepts that Daniel had to fit into the Philosophical Language's tables. Daniel was hard at work compiling a list of all the things in the world that a person could own (aquæducts, axle-trees, palaces, hinges) when Wilkins called him down urgently. Daniel came down to find the Rev. holding a grand-looking Letter, and Charles Comstock clearing the decks for action: rolling up large diagrams of the Ark, and feeding-schedules for the eighteen hundred and twenty-five sheep, and stowing them out of the way to make room for more important affairs. Charles II, by the Grace of God of England King, had sent them this letter: His Majesty had noticed that ant eggs were bigger than ants, and demanded to know how that was possible. Daniel ran out and sacked an ant-nest. He returned in triumph carrying the nucleus of an anthill on the flat of a shovel. In the front room Wilkins had begun dictating, and Charles Comstock scribbling, a letter back to the King – not the substantive part (as they didn't have an answer yet), but the lengthy paragraphs of apologies and profuse flattery that had to open it: 'With your brilliance you illuminate the places that have long, er, languished in, er – ' 'Sounds more like a Sun King allusion, Reverend,' Charles warned him. 'Strike it, then! Sharp lad. Read the entire mess back to me.' Daniel slowed before the door to Hooke's laboratory, gathering his courage to knock. But Hooke had heard him approaching, and opened it for him. With an outstretched hand he beckoned Daniel in, and aimed him at a profoundly stained table, cleared for action. Daniel entered the room, upended the ant-nest, set the shovel down, and only then worked up the courage to inhale. Hooke's laboratory didn't smell as bad as he'd always assumed it would. Hooke ran his hands back through his hair, pulling it away from his face, and tied it back behind his neck with a wisp of twine. Daniel was perpetually surprised that Hooke was only ten years older than he. Hooke just turned thirty a few weeks ago, in June, at about the same time that Daniel and Isaac had fled plaguey Cambridge for their respective homes. Hooke was now staring at the mound of living dirt on his tabletop. His eyes were always focused on a narrow target, as if he peered out at the world through a hollow reed. When he was out in the broad world, or even in the house's front room, that seemed strange, but it made sense when he was looking at a small world on a tabletop – ants scurrying this way and that, carrying egg-cases out of the wreckage, establishing a defensive perimeter. Daniel stood opposite and looked at, but apparently did not see, the same things. Within a few minutes Daniel had seen most of what he was going to see among the ants, within five minutes he was bored, within ten he had given up all pretenses and begun wandering round Hooke's laboratory, looking at the remnants of everything that had passed beneath the microscope: shards of porous stone, bits of moldy shoe-leather, a small glass jar labelledwilkins urine , splinters of petrified wood, countless tiny envelopes of seeds, insects in jars, scraps of various fabrics, tiny pots labelledsnails teeth andvipers fangs .Shoved back into a corner, a heap of dusty, rusty sharp things: knife-blades, needles, razors. There was probably a cruel witticism to be made here: given a razor, Hooke would sooner put it under his microscope than shave with it. As the wait went on, and on, and on, Daniel decided that he might as well be improving himself. So with care he reached into the sharp-things pile, drew out a needle, and carried it over to a table where sun was pouring in (Hooke had grabbed all of the south-facing rooms in the cottage, to own the light). There, mounted to a little stand, was a tube, about the dimensions of a piece of writing-paper rolled up, with a lens at the top for looking through, and a much smaller one – hardly bigger than a chick's eye – at the bottom, aimed at a little stand that was strongly illuminated by the sunlight. Daniel put the needle on the stand and peered through the Microscope. He expected to see a gleaming, mirrorlike shaft, but it was a gnawed stick instead. The needle's sharp point turned out to be a rounded and pitted slag-heap. 'Mr. Waterhouse,' Hooke said, 'when you are finished with whatever you are doing, I will consult my faithful Mercury.' Daniel stood up and turned around. He thought for a moment that Hooke was asking him to fetch some quicksilver (Hooke drank it from time to time, as a remedy for headaches, vertigo, and other complaints). But Hooke's giant eyes were focused on the Microscope instead. 'Of course!' Daniel said. Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods – bringer of information. 'What think you now of needles?' Hooke asked. Daniel plucked the needle away and held it up before the window, viewing it in a new light. 'Its appearance is almost physically disgusting,' he said. 'A razor looks worse. It is all kinds of shapes, except what it should be,' Hooke said. 'That is why I never use the Microscope any more to look at things that were made by men – the rudeness and bungling of Art is painful to view. And yet things that one would expect to look disgusting become beautiful when magnified – you may look at my drawings while I satisfy the King's curiosity.' Hooke gestured to a stack of papers, then carried a sample ant-egg over to the microscope as Daniel began to page through them. 'Sir. I did not know that you were an artist,' Daniel said. 'When my father died, I was apprenticed to a portrait-painter,' Hooke said. 'Your master taught you well – ' 'The ass taught me nothing, ' Hooke said. 'Anyone who is not a half-wit can learn all there is to know of painting, by standing in front of paintings and looking at them. What was the use, then, of being an apprentice?' 'This flea is a magnificent piece of – ' 'It is not art but a higher form of bungling, ' Hooke demurred. 'When I viewed that flea under the microscope, I could see, in its eye, a complete and perfect reflection of John Comstock's gardens and manor-house – the blossoms on his flowers, the curtains billowing in his windows.' 'It's magnificent to me,' Daniel said. He was sincere – not trying to be a Flattering Parasite or Crafty Knave. But Hooke only became irritated. 'I tell you again. True beauty is to be found in natural forms. The more we magnify, and the closer we examine, the works of Artifice, the grosser and stupider they seem. But if we magnify the natural world it only becomes more intricate and excellent.' Wilkins had asked Daniel which he preferred: Wren's glass apiary, or the bees' honeycomb inside of it. Then he had warned Daniel that Hooke was coming into earshot. Now Daniel understood why: for Hooke there could only be one answer. 'I defer to you, sir.' 'Thank you, sir.' 'But without seeming to be a Cavilling Jesuit, I should like to know whether Wilkins's urine is a product of Art or Nature.' 'You saw the jar.' 'Yes.' 'If you take the Rev.'s urine and pour off the fluid and examine what remains under the Microscope, you will see a hoard of jewels that would make the Great Mogul swoon. At lower magnification it seems nothing more than a heap of gravel, but with a better lens, and brighter light, it is revealed as a mountain of crystals – plates, rhomboids, rectangles, squares – white and yellow and red ones, gleaming like the diamonds in a courtier's ring.' 'Is that true of everyone's urine?' 'It is more true of his than of most people's,' Hooke said. 'Wilkins has the stone.' 'Oh, God!' 'It is not so bad now, but it grows within him, and will certainly kill him in a few years,' Hooke said. 'And the stone in his bladder is made of the same stuff as these crystals that you see in his urine?' 'I believe so.' 'Is there some way to – ' 'To dissolve it? Oil of vitriol works – but I don't suppose that our Reverend wants to have that introduced into his bladder. You are welcome to make investigations of your own. I have tried all of the obvious things.' WORD ARRIVED THAT FERMAT had died, leaving behind a theorem or two that still needed proving. King Philip of Spain died, too, and his son succeeded him; but the new King Carlos II was sickly, and not expected to live to the end of the year. Portugal was independent. Someone named Lubomirski was staging a rebellion in Poland. John Wilkins was trying to make horse-drawn vehicles more efficient; to test them, he had rigged up a weight on a rope, above a well, so that when the weight fell down into the well, it would drag his chariots across the ground. Their progress could then be timed using one of Hooke's watches. That duty fell to Charles Comstock, who spent many days standing out in the field making trials or fixing broken wheels. His father's servants needed the well to draw water for livestock, and so Charles was frequently called out to move the contraption out of the way. Daniel enjoyed watching all of this, out the window, while he worked on Punishments: PUNISHMENTS CAPITAL ARE THE VARIOUS MANNERS OF PUTTING MEN TO DEATH IN A JUDICIAL WAY, WHICH IN SEVERALN ATIONS ARE, OR HAVE BEEN, EITHER S IMPLE ; BY Separation of the parts; Head from Body: BEHEADING, strike of one's head Member from Member: QUARTERING, Dissecting. Wound At distance, whether from hand: STONING, Pelting from Instrument, as Gun, Bow, &c.: SHOOTING. At hand, either by Weight; of something else: PRESSING. of one's own: PRECIPITATING, Defenestration, casting headlong. Weapon; any way: STABBING direct upwards: EMPALING Taking away necessary Diet: or giving that which is noxious STARVING, famishing POISONING, Venom, envenom, virulent Interception of the air at theMouth in the air: stifling, smother, suffocate. in the Earth: BURYING ALIVE in water: DROWNING in fire: BURNING ALIVE at theThroat by weight of a man's own body: HANGING by the strength of others: STRANGLING, throttle, choke, suffocate MIXED OF WOUNDING AND STARVING; THE BODY BEING Erect : CRUCIFYING Lying on a Wheel : BREAKING ON THE WHEEL PUNISHMENTS NOT CAPITAL ARE DISTINGUISHED BY THE THINGS OR SUBJECTS RECEIVING DETRIMENT BY THEM, AS BEING EITHER OF THE BODY; according to theGeneral name; signifying great pain: TORTURE according to special kinds: byStriking; with a limber instrument: WHIPPING, lashing, scourging, leashing, rod, slash, switch, stripe, Beadle with a stiff instrument: CUDGELLING, bastinado, baste, swinge, swaddle, shrubb, slapp, thwack; byStretching of the limbs violently; the body being laid along: RACK the body lifted up into the Air: STRAPPADO LIBERTY ;OF WHICH ONE IS DEPRIVED, BY RESTRAINT into a place: IMPRISONMENT, Incarceration, Durance, Custody, Ward, clap up, commit, confine, mure, Pound, Pinfold, Gaol, Cage, Set fast anInstrument: BONDS, fetters, gyves, shackles, manicles, pinion, chains. Out of a place or country, whether with allowance of any other: EXILE, banishment confinement to one other: RELEGATION Repute, whether more gently: INFAMIZATION, Ignominy, Pillory more severely by burning marks in one's flesh: STIGMATIZATION, Branding, Cauterizing Estate; whether in part: MULCT, fine, sconce in whole: CONFISCATION, forfeiture Dignity and power;by depriving one of his degree: DEGRADING, deposing, depriving his capacity to bear office: INCAPACITATING, cashier, disable, discard, depose, disfranchize. As Daniel scourged, bastinadoed, racked, and strappadoed his mind, trying to think of punishments that he and Wilkins had missed, he heard Hooke striking sparks with flint and steel, and went down to investigate. Hooke was aiming the sparks at a blank sheet of paper. 'Mark where they strike,' he said to Daniel. Daniel hovered with a pen, and whenever an especially large spark hit the paper, he drew a tight circle around it. They examined the paper under the Microscope, and found, in the center of each circle, a remnant: a more or less complete hollow sphere of what was obviously steel. 'You see that the Alchemists' conception of heat is ludicrous,' Hooke said. 'There is no Element of Fire. Heat is really nothing more than a brisk agitation of the parts of a body – hit a piece of steel with a rock hard enough, and a bit of steel is torn away – ' 'And that is the spark?' 'That is the spark.' 'But why does the spark emit light?' 'The force of the impact agitates its parts so vehemently that it becomes hot enough to melt.' 'Yes, but if your hypothesis is correct – if there is no Element of Fire, only a jostling of internal parts – then why should hot things emit light?' 'I believe that light consists of vibrations. If the parts move violently enough, they emit light – just as a struck bell vibrates to produce sound.' Daniel supposed that was all there was to that, until he went with Hooke to collect samples of river insects one day, and they squatted in a place where a brook tumbled over the brink of a rock into a little pool. Bubbles of water, forced beneath the pool by the falling water, rose to the surface: millions of tiny spheres. Hooke noticed it, pondered for a few moments, and said: 'Planets and stars are spheres, for the same reason that bubbles and sparks are.' 'What!?' 'A body of fluid, surrounded by some different fluid, forms into a sphere.Thus: air surrounded by water makes a sphere, which we call a bubble. A tiny bit of molten steel surrounded by air makes a sphere, which we call a spark. Molten earth surrounded by the Cœlestial Æther makes a sphere, which we call a planet.' And on the way back, as they were watching a crescent moon chase the sun below the horizon, Hooke said, 'If we could make sparks, or flashes of light, bright enough, we could see their light reflected off the shadowed part of that moon later, and reckon the speed of light.' 'If we did it with gunpowder,' Daniel reflected, 'John Comstock would be happy to underwrite the experiment.' Hooke turned and regarded him for a few moments with a cold eye, as if trying to establish whether Daniel, too, was made up out of cells. 'You are thinking like a courtier,' he said. There was no emotion in his voice; he was stating, not an opinion, but a fact. The chief Design of the aforementioned Club, was to propagate new Whims, advance mechanic Exercises, and to promote useless, as well as useful Experiments. In order to carry on this commendable Undertaking, any frantic Artist, chemical Operator, or whimsical Projector, that had but a Crotchet in their Heads, or but dream'd themselves into some strange fanciful Discovery, might be kindly admitted, as welcome Brethren, into this teeming Society, where each Member was respected, not according to his Quality, but the searches he had made into the Mysteries of Nature, and the Novelties, though Trifles, that were owing to his Invention: So that a Mad-man, who had beggar'd himself by his Bellows and his Furnaces, in a vain pursuit of the Philosopher's Stone; or the crazy Physician who had wasted his Patrimony, by endeavouring to recover that infallible Nostrum, Sal Graminis , from the dust and ashes of a burnt Hay-cock, were as much reverenc'd here, as those mechanic Quality, who, to shew themselves Vertuoso's , would sit turning of Ivory above in their Garrets, whilst their Ladies below Stairs, by the help of their He-Cousins, were providing Horns for their Families. – NED WARD, The Vertuoso's Club THE LEAVES WERE TURNING, the Plague in London was worse. Eight thousand people died in a week. A few miles away in Epsom, Wilkins had finished the Ark digression and begun to draw up a grammar, and a system of writing, for his Philosophical Language. Daniel was finishing some odds and ends, viz. Nautical Objects: Seams and Spurkets, Parrels and Jears, Brales and Bunt-Lines. His mind wandered. Below him, a strange plucking sound, like a man endlessly tuning a lute. He went down stairs and found Hooke sitting there with a few inches of quill sticking out of his ear, plucking a string stretched over a wooden box. It was far from the strangest thing Hooke had ever done, so Daniel went to work for a time, trying to dissolve Wilkins's bladder-gravel in various potions. Hooke continued plucking and humming. Finally Daniel went over to investigate. A housefly was perched on the end of the quill that was stuck in Hooke's ear. Daniel tried to shoo it away. Its wings blurred, but it didn't move. Looking more closely Daniel saw that it had been glued down. 'Do that again, it gives me a different pitch,' Hooke demanded. 'You can hear the fly's wings?' 'They drone at a certain fixed pitch. If I tune this string' – pluck, pluck – “to the same pitch, I know that the string, and the fly's wings, are vibrating at the same frequency. I already know how to reckon the frequency of a string's vibration – hence, I know how many times in a second a fly's wings beat. Useful data if we are ever to build a flying-machine.' Autumn rain made the field turn mucky, and ended the chariot experiments. Charles Comstock had to find other things to do. He had matriculated at Cambridge this year, but Cambridge was closed for the duration of the Plague. Daniel reckoned that as a quid pro quo for staying here at Epsom, Wilkins was obliged to tutor Charles in Natural Philosophy. But most of the tutoring was indistinguishable from drudge work on Wilkins's diverse experiments, many of which (now that the weather had turned) were being conducted in the cottage's cellar. Wilkins was starving a toad in a jar to see if new toads would grow out of it. There was a carp living out of water, being fed on moistened bread; Charles's job was to wet its gills several times a day. The King's ant question had gotten Wilkins going on an experiment he'd wanted to try for a long time: before long, down in the cellar, between the starving toad and the carp, they had a maggot the size of a man's thigh, which had to be fed rotten meat, and weighed once a day. This began to smell and so they moved it outside, to a shack downwind, where Wilkins had also embarked on a whole range of experiments concerning the generation of flies and worms out of decomposing meat, cheese, and other substances. Everyone knew, or thought they knew, that this happened spontaneously. But Hooke with his microscope had found tiny motes on the undersides of certain leaves, which grew up into insects, and in water he had found tiny eggs that grew up into gnats, and this had given him the idea that perhaps all things that were believed to be bred from putrefaction might have like origins: that the air and the water were filled with an invisible dust of tiny eggs and seeds that, in order to germinate, need only be planted in something moist and rotten. From time to time, a carriage or wagon from the outside world was suffered to pass into the gate of the manor and approach the big house. On the one hand, this was welcome evidence that some people were still alive out there in England. On the other – 'Who is that madman, coming and going in the midst of the Plague,' Daniel asked, 'and why does John Comstock let him into his house? The poxy bastard'll infect us all.' 'John Comstock could not exclude that fellow any more than he could ban air from his lungs,' Wilkins said. He had been tracking the carriage's progress, at a safe distance, through a prospective glass. 'That is his money-scrivener.' Daniel had never heard the term before. 'I have not yet reached that point in the Tables where ‘money-scrivener' is defined. Does he do what a goldsmith does?' 'Smite gold? No.' 'Of course not. I was referring to this new line of work that goldsmiths have got into – handling notes that serve as money.' 'A man such as the Earl of Epsom would not suffer a money-goldsmith to draw within a mile of his house!' Wilkins said indignantly. 'A money-scrivener is different altogether! And yet he does something very much the same.' 'Could you explain that, please?' Daniel said, but they were interrupted by Hooke, shouting from another room: 'Daniel! Fetch a cannon.' In other circumstances this demand would have posed severe difficulties. However, they were living on the estate of the man who had introduced the manufacture of gunpowder to Britain, and provided King Charles II with many of his armaments. So Daniel went out and enlisted that man's son, young Charles Comstock, who in turn drafted a corps of servants and a few horses. They procured a field-piece from John Comstock's personal armoury and towed it out into the middle of a pasture. Meanwhile, Mr. Hooke had caused a certain servant, who had long been afflicted with deafness, to be brought out from the town. Hooke bade the servant stand in the same pasture, only a fathom away from the muzzle of the cannon (but off to one side!). Charles Comstock (who knew how to do such things) charged the cannon with some of his father's finest powder, shoved a longish fuse down the touch-hole, lit it, and ran away. The result was a sudden immense compression of the air, which Hooke had hoped would penetrate the servant's skull and knock away whatever hidden obstructions had caused him to become deaf. Quite a few window-panes in John Comstock's manor house were blown out of their frames, amply demonstrating the soundness of the underlying idea. But it didn't cure the servant's deafness. 'As you may know, my dwelling is a-throng, just now, with persons from the city,' said John Comstock, Earl of Epsom and Lord Chancellor of England. He had appeared, suddenly and unannounced, in the door of the cottage. Hooke and Wilkins were busy hollering at the deaf servant, trying to see if he could hear anything at all. Daniel noticed the visitor first, and joined in the shouting: 'Excuse me! Gentlemen! REVEREND WILKINS!' After several minutes' confusion, embarrassment, and makeshift stabs at protocol, Wilkins and Comstock ended up sitting across the table from each other with glasses of claret while Hooke and Waterhouse and the deaf servant held up a nearby wall with their arses. Comstock was pushing sixty. Here on his own country estate, he had no patience with wigs or other Court foppery, and so his silver hair was simply queued, and he was dressed in plain simple riding-and-hunting togs. 'In the year of my birth, Jamestown was founded, the pilgrims scurried off to Leyden, and work commenced on the King James version of the Bible. I have lived through London's diverse riots and panics, plagues and Gunpowder Plots. I have escaped from burning buildings. I was wounded at the Battle of Newark and made my way, in some discomfort, to safety in Paris. It was not my last battle, on land or at sea. I was there when His Majesty was crowned in exile at Scone, and I was there when he returned in triumph to London. I have killed men. You know all of these things, Dr. Wilkins, and so I mention them, not to boast, but to emphasize that if I were living a solitary life in that large House over yonder, you could set off cannonades, and larger detonations, at all hours of day and night, without warning, and for that matter you could make a pile of meat five fathoms high and let it fester away beneath my bedchamber's window – and none of it would matter to me.But as it is, my house is crowded, just now, with Persons of Quality. Some of them are of royal degree. Many of them are female , and some are of tender years. Two of them are all three. ' 'My lord!' Wilkins exclaimed. Daniel had been carefully watching him, as who wouldn't – the opportunity to watch a man like Wilkins being called on the carpet by a man like Comstock was far more precious than any Southwark bear-baiting. Until just now, Wilkins had pretended to be mortified – though he'd done a very good job of it. But now, suddenly, he really was. Two of them are all three – what could that possibly mean? Who was royal, female, and of tender years? King Charles II didn't have any daughters, at least legitimate ones. Elizabeth, the Winter Queen, had littered Europe with princes and princesses until she'd passed away a couple of years ago – but it seemed unlikely that any Continental royalty would be visiting England during the Plague. Comstock continued: 'These persons have come here seeking refuge, as they are terrified to begin with, of the Plague and other horrors – including, but hardly limited to, a possible Dutch invasion. The violent compression of the air, which you and I might think of as a possible cure for deafness, is construed, by such people, entirely differently . . .' Wilkins said something fiendishly clever and appropriate and then devoted the next couple of days to abjectly humbling himself and apologizing to every noble person within ear- and nose-shot of the late Experiments. Hooke was put to work making little wind-up toys for the two little royal girls. Meanwhile Daniel and Charles had to dismantle all of the bad-smelling experiments, and oversee their decent burials, and generally tidy things up. It took days' peering at Fops through hedges, deconstructing carriage-door scutcheons, and shinnying out onto the branches of diverse noble and royal family trees for Daniel to understand what Wilkins had inferred from a few of John Comstock's pithy words and eyebrow-raisings. Comstock had formal gardens to one side of his house, which for many excellent reasons were off-limits to Natural Philosophers. Persons in French clothes strolled in them. That was not remarkable. To dally in gardens was some people's life-work, as to shovel manure was a stable-hand's. At a distance they all looked the same, at least to Daniel. Wilkins, much more conversant with the Court, spied on them from time to time through a prospective-glass. As a mariner, seeking to establish his bearings at night, will first look for Ursa Major, that being a constellation of exceptional size and brightness, so Wilkins would always commence his obs'v'ns. by zeroing his sights, as it were, on a particular woman who was easy to find because she was twice the size of everyone else. Many furlongs of gaily dyed fabrics went into her skirts, which shewed bravely from a distance, like French regimental standards. From time to time a man with blond hair would come out and stroll about the garden with her, moon orbiting planet. He reminded Daniel, from a distance, of Isaac. House of Stuart House of Orange-Nassau Daniel did not reck who that fellow was, and was too abashed to discover his ignorance by asking, until one day a carriage arrived from London and several men in admirals' hats climbed out of it and went to talk to the same man in the garden. Though first they all doffed those hats and bowed low. 'That blond man who walks in the garden, betimes, on the arm of the Big Dipper – would that be the Duke of York?' 'Yes,' said Wilkins – not wishing to say more, as he was breathing shallowly, his eye peeled wide open and bathed in a greenish light from the eyepiece of his prospective-glass. 'And Lord High Admiral,' Daniel continued. 'He has many titles,' Wilkins observed in a level and patient tone. 'So those chaps in the hats would be – obviously – ' 'The Admiralty,' Wilkins said curtly, 'or some moiety or faction thereof.' He recoiled from the scope. Daniel phant'sied he was being proffered a look-see, but only for a moment – Wilkins lifted the instrument out of the tree-crook and collapsed it. Daniel collected that he had seen something Wilkins wished he hadn't. The Dutch and the English were at war. Because of the Plague, this had been a desultory struggle thus far, and Daniel had forgotten about it. It was midwinter. Cold had brought the Plague to a stand. Months would pass before the weather permitted resumption of the sea-campaign. But the time to lay plans for such campaigns was now. It ought to surprise no one if the Admiralty met with the Lord High Admiral now. It would be surprising if they didn't. What struck Daniel was that Wilkins cared that he, Daniel, had seen something. The Restoration, and Daniel's Babylonian exile and subjugation at Cambridge, had led him to think of himself as a perfect nobody, except perhaps when it came to Natural Philosophy – and it was more obvious every day that even within the Royal Society he was nothing compared to Wren and Hooke. So why should John Wilkins give a fig whether Daniel spied a flotilla of admirals and collected, from that, that John Comstock was hosting James, Duke of York, brother of Charles II and next in line to the throne? It must be (as Daniel realized, walking back through a defoliated orchard alongside the brooding Wilkins) because he was the son of Drake. And though Drake was a retired agitator of a defeated and downcast sect, at bay in his house on Holborn, someone was still afraid of him. Or if not of him, then of his sect. But the sect was shattered into a thousand claques and cabals. Cromwell was gone, Drake was too old, Gregory Bolstrood had been executed, and his son Knott was in exile – That was it. They were afraid of Daniel. 'What is funny?' Wilkins demanded. 'People,' Daniel said, 'and what goes on in their minds sometimes.' 'I say, you're not referring to me by that – ? – !' 'Oh, perish the thought. I would not mock my betters.' 'Pray, who on this estate is not your better?' A hard question that. Daniel's answer was silence. Wilkins seemed to find even that alarming. 'I forget you are a Phanatique born and bred.' Which was the same as saying, You recognize no man as your better, do you? 'On the contrary, I see now that you have never forgotten it.' But something seemed to have changed in Wilkins's mind. Like an Admiral working his ship to windward, he had suddenly come about and, after a few moments' luffing and disarray, was now on an altogether novel tack: 'The lady used to be called Anne Hyde – a close relation of John Comstock. So, far from common. Yet too common for a Duke to marry. And yet still too noble to send off to a Continental nunnery, and too fat to move far, in any case. She bore him a couple of daughters: Mary, then Anne. The Duke finally married her, though not without many complications. Since Mary or Anne could conceivably inherit the throne one day, it became a State matter. Various courtiers were talked, bribed, or threatened into coming forward and swearing on stacks of Bibles that they'd fucked Anne Hyde up and down, fucked her in the British Isles and in France, in the Low Countries and the Highlands, in the city and in the country, in ships and palaces, beds and hammocks, bushes, flower-beds, water-closets, and garrets, that they had fucked her drunk and fucked her sober, from behind and in front, from above, below, and both the right and left sides, singly and in groups, in the day and in the night and during all phases of the moon and signs of the Zodiac, whilst also intimating that any number of blacksmiths, Vagabonds, French gigolos, Jesuit provocateurs, comedians, barbers, and apprentice saddlers had been doing the same whensoever they weren't. But despite all of this the Duke of York married her, and socked her away in St. James's Palace, where she's grown like one of our entomologickal prodigies in the cellar.' Daniel had heard a good bit of this before, of course, from men who came to the house on Holborn to pay court to Drake – which gave him the odd sense that Wilkins was paying court to him. Which could not be, for Daniel had no real power or significance at all, and no prospects of getting any. It seemed more plausible that Wilkins felt sorry for Daniel, than afraid of him; and as such was trying to shield him from those dangers that were avoidable while tutoring him in how to cope with the rest. Which meant, if true, that Daniel ought at least to attend to the lesson that Wilkins was trying to give him. The two Princesses, Mary and Anne, would, respectively, be three and one years old now. And as their mother was related to John Comstock, it was entirely plausible that they might be visitors in the house. Which explained Comstock's remark to Wilkins: 'Two of them are all three. ' Female, of tender years, and royal. The burdensome restrictions imposed on their Natural-Philosophic researches by the host made it necessary to convene a very long Symposium in the Kitchen, where Hooke and Wilkins dictated a list (written by Daniel in a loosening hand) of experiments that were neither noisy nor smelly, but (as the evening wore on) increasingly fanciful. Hooke put Daniel to work mending his Condensing Engine, which was a piston-and-cylinder arrangement for compressing or rarefying air. He was convinced that air contained some kind of spirit that sustained both fire and life, which, when it was used up, caused both to be extinguished. So there was a whole range of experiments along the lines of: sealing up a candle and a mouse in a glass vessel, and watching to see what happened (mouse died before candle). They fixed up a huge bladder so that it was leak-proof, and put it to their mouths, and took turns breathing the same air over and over again, to see what would happen. Hooke used his engine to produce a vacuum in a large glass jar, then set a pendulum swinging in the vacuum, and set Charles there to count its swings. On the first really clear night at the onset of winter, Hooke had gone outside with a telescope and peered at Mars: he had found some light and dark patches on its surface, and ever since had been tracking their movements so that he could figure out how long it took that planet to rotate on its axis. He put Charles and Daniel to work grinding better and better lenses, or else bought them from Spinoza in Amsterdam, and they took turns looking at smaller and smaller structures on the moon. But here again, Hooke saw things Daniel didn't. 'The moon must have gravity, like the earth,' he said. 'What makes you say so?' 'The mountains and valleys have a settled shape to them – no matter how rugged the landforms, there is nothing to be seen, on that whole orb, that would fall over under gravitation. With better lenses I could measure the Angle of Repose and calculate the force of her gravity.' 'If the moon gravitates, so must everything else in the heavens,' Daniel observed.* A long skinny package arrived from Amsterdam. Daniel opened it up, expecting to find another telescope – instead it was a straight, skinny horn, about five feet long, with helical ridges and grooves. 'What is it?' he asked Wilkins. Wilkins peered at it over his glasses and said (sounding mildly annoyed), 'The horn of a unicorn.' 'But I thought that the unicorn was a mythical beast.' ' I'venever seen one.' 'Then where do you suppose this came from?' 'How the devil should I know?' Wilkins returned. 'All I know is, you can buy them in Amsterdam.' Kings most commonly, though strong in legions, are but weak in Arguments; as they who have ever accustom'd from the Cradle to use thir will onely as thir right hand, thir reason alwayes as thir left. Whence unexpectedly constrain'd to that kind of combat, they prove but weak and puny Adversaries. – MILTON, PREFACE TO Eikonoklastes DANIEL GOT USED TO SEEING the Duke of York out riding and hunting with his princely friends – as much as the son of Drake could get used to such a sight. Once the hunters rode past within a bowshot of him, near enough that he could hear the Duke talking to his companion – in French.Which gave Daniel an impulse to rush up to this French Catholic man in his French clothes, who claimed to be England's next king, and put an end to him. He mastered it by recalling to mind the way that the Duke's father's head had plopped into the basket on the scaffold at the Banqueting House. Then he thought to himself: What an odd family! Too, he could no longer muster quite the same malice towards these people. Drake had raised his sons to hate the nobility by wasting no opportunity to point out their privileges, and the way they profited from those privileges without really being aware of them. This sort of discourse had wrought extraordinarily, not only in Drake's sons but in every Dissident meeting-house in the land, and led to Cromwell and much else; but Cromwell had made Puritans powerful, and as Daniel was now seeing, that power – as if it were a living thing with a mind of its own – was trying to pass itself on to him, which would mean that Daniel was a child of privilege too. The tables of the Philosophical Language were finished: a vast fine-meshed net drawn through the Cosmos so that everything known, in Heaven and Earth, was trapped in one of its myriad cells. All that was needed to identify a particular thing was to give its location in the tables, which could be expressed as a series of numbers. Wilkins came up with a system for assigning names to things, so that by breaking a name up into its component syllables, one could know its location in the Tables, and hence what thing it referred to. Wilkins drained all the blood out of a large dog and put it into a smaller dog; minutes later the smaller dog was out chasing sticks. Hooke built a new kind of clock, using the Microscope to examine some of its tiny parts. In so doing he discovered a new kind of mite living in the rags in which these parts had been wrapped. He drew pictures of them, and then performed an exhaustive three-day series of experiments to learn what would and wouldn't kill them: the most effective killer being a Florentine poison he'd been brewing out of tobacco leaves. Sir Robert Moray came to visit, and ground up a bit of the unicorn's horn to make a powder, which he sprinkled in a ring, and placed a spider in the center of the ring. But the spider kept escaping. Moray pronounced the horn to be a fraud. Wilkins hustled Daniel out of bed one night in the wee hours and took him on a dangerous nighttime hay-wain ride to the gaol in Epsom town. 'Fortune has smiled on our endeavours,' Wilkins said. 'The man we are going to interview was condemned to hang. But hanging crushes the parts that are of interest to us – certain delicate structures in the neck. Fortunately for us, before the hangman could get to him, he died of a bloody flux.' 'Is this going to be a new addition to the Tables, then?' Daniel asked wearily. 'Don't be foolish – the anatomical structures in question have been known for centuries. This dead man is going to help us with the Real Character.' 'That's the alphabet for writing down the Philosophical Language?' 'You know that perfectly well. Wake up, Daniel!' 'I ask only because it seems to me you've already come up with several Real Characters.' 'All more or less arbitrary. A natural philosopher on some other world, viewing a document written in those characters, would think that he were reading, not the Philosophical Language, but the Cryptonomicon! What we need is a systematic alphabet – made so that the shapes of the characters themselves provide full information as to how they are pronounced.' These words filled Daniel with a foreboding that turned out to be fully justified: by the time the sun rose, they had fetched the dead man from the gaol, brought him back out to the cottage, and carefully cut his head off. Charles Comstock was rousted from bed and ordered to dissect the corpse, as a lesson in anatomy (and as a way of getting rid of it). Meanwhile, Hooke and Wilkins connected the head's wind-pipe to a large set of fireplace-bellows, so that they could blow air through his voice-box. Daniel was detailed to saw off the top of the skull and get rid of the brains so that he could reach in through the back and get hold of the soft palate, tongue, and other meaty bits responsible for making sounds. With Daniel thus acting as a sort of meat puppeteer, and Hooke manipulating the lips and nostrils, and Wilkins plying the bellows, they were able to make the head speak. When his speaking-parts were squished into one configuration he made a very clear 'O' sound, which Daniel (very tired now) found just a bit unsettling. Wilkins wrote down an O -shaped character, reflecting the shape of the man's lips. This experiment went on all day, Wilkins reminding the others, when they showed signs of tiredness, that this rare head wouldn't keep forever – as if that weren't already obvious. They made the head utter thirty-four different sounds. For each one of them, Wilkins drew out a letter that was a sort of quick freehand sketch of the positions of lips, tongue, and other bits responsible for making that noise. Finally they turned the head over to Charles Comstock, to continue his anatomy-lesson, and Daniel went to bed for a series of rich nightmares. Looking at Mars had put Hooke in mind of cœlestial affairs; for that reason he set out with Daniel one morning in a wagon, with a chest of equipment. This must have been important, because Hooke packed it himself, and wouldn't let anyone else near it. Wilkins kept trying to persuade them to use the giant wheel, instead of borrowing one of John Comstock's wagons (and further wearing out their welcome). Wilkins claimed that the giant wheel, propelled by the youthful and vigorous Daniel Waterhouse, could (in theory) traverse fields, bogs, and reasonably shallow bodies of water with equal ease, so they could simply travel in a perfectly straight line to their destination, instead of having to follow roads. Hooke declined, and chose the wagon. They traveled for several hours to a certain well, said to be more than three hundred feet deep, bored down through solid chalk. Hooke's mere appearance was enough to chase away the local farmers, who were only loitering and drinking anyway. He got Daniel busy constructing a solid, level platform over the mouth of the well. Hooke meanwhile took out his best scale and began to clean and calibrate it. He explained, 'For the sake of argument, suppose it really is true that planets are kept in their orbits, not by vortices in the æther, but by the force of gravity.' 'Yes?' 'Then, if you do some mathematicks, you can see that it simply would not work unless the force of gravity got weaker, as the distance from the center of attraction increased.' 'So the weight of an object should diminish as it rises?' 'And increase as it descends,' Hooke said, nodding significantly at the well. 'Aha! So the experiment is to weigh something here at the surface, and then to . . .' and here Daniel stopped, horror-stricken. Hooke twisted his bent neck around and peered at him curiously. Then, for the first time since Daniel had met him, he laughed out loud. 'You're afraid that I'm proposing to lower you, Daniel Waterhouse, three hundred feet down into the bottom of this well, with a scale in your lap, to weigh something? And that once down there the rope will break?' More laughing. 'You need to think more carefully about what I said.' 'Of course – it wouldn't work that way,' Daniel said, deeply embarrassed on more than one level. 'And why not?' Hooke asked, Socratically. 'Because the scale works by balancing weights on one pan against the object to be weighed, on the other . . . and if it's true that all objects are heavier at the bottom of the well, then both the object, and the weights, will be heavier by the same amount . . . and so the result will be the same, and will teach us nothing.' 'Help me measure out three hundred feet of thread,' Hooke said, no longer amused. They did it by pulling the thread off a reel, and stretching it alongside a one-fathom-long rod, and counting off fifty fathoms. One end of the thread Hooke tied to a heavy brass slug. He set the scale up on the platform that Daniel had improvised over the mouth of the well, and put the slug, along with its long bundle of thread, on the pan. He weighed the slug and thread carefully – a seemingly endless procedure disturbed over and over by light gusts of wind. To get a reliable measurement, they had to devote a couple of hours to setting up a canvas wind-screen. Then Hooke spent another half hour peering at the scale's needle through a magnifying lens while adding or subtracting bits of gold foil, no heavier than snowflakes. Every change caused the scale to teeter back and forth for several minutes before settling into a new position. Finally, Hooke called out a weight in pounds, ounces, grains, and fractions of grains, and Daniel noted it down. Then Hooke tied the free end of the thread to a little eye he had screwed to the bottom of the pan, and he and Daniel took turns lowering the weight into the well, letting it drop a few inches at a time – if it got to swinging, and scraped against the chalky sides of the hole, it would pick up a bit of extra weight, and ruin the experiment. When all three hundred feet had been let out, Hooke went for a stroll, because the weight was swinging a little bit, and its movements would disturb the scale. Finally it settled down enough that he could go back to work with his magnifying glass and his tweezers. Daniel, in other words, had a lot of time to think that day. Cells, spiders' eyes, unicorns' horns, compressed and rarefied air, dramatic cures for deafness, philosophical languages, and flying chariots were all perfectly fine subjects, but lately Hooke's interest had been straying into matters cœlestial, and that made Daniel think about his roommate. Just as certain self-styled philosophers in minor European courts were frantic to know what Hooke and Wilkins were up to at Epsom, so Daniel wanted only to know what Isaac was doing up at Woolsthorpe. 'It weighs the same,' Hooke finally pronounced, 'three hundred feet of altitude makes no measurable difference.' That was the signal to pack up all the apparatus and let the farmers draw their water again. 'This proves nothing,' Hooke said as they rode home through the dark. 'The scale is not precise enough. But if one were to construct a clock, driven by a pendulum, in a sealed glass vessel, so that changes in moisture and baroscopic pressure would not affect its speed . . . and if one were to run that clock in the bottom of a well for a long period of time . . . any difference in the pendulum's weight would be manifest as a slowing, or quickening, of the clock.' 'But how would you know that it was running slow or fast?' Daniel asked. 'You'd have to compare it against another clock.' 'Or against the rotation of the earth,' Hooke said. But it seemed that Daniel's question had thrown him into a dark mood, and he said nothing more until they had reached Epsom, after midnight. THE TEMPERATURE AT NIGHT began to fall below freezing, and so it was time to calibrate thermometers. Daniel and Charles and Hooke had been making them for some weeks out of yard-long glass tubes, filled with spirits of wine, dyed with cochineal. But they had no markings on them. On cold nights they would bundle themselves up and immerse those thermometers in tubs of distilled water and then sit there for hours, giving the tubs an occasional stir, and waiting. When the water froze, if they listened carefully enough, they could hear a faint searing, splintering noise come out of the tub as flakes of ice shot across the surface – then they'd rouse themselves into action, using diamonds to make a neat scratch on each tube, marking the position of the red fluid inside. Hooke kept a square of black velvet outside so that it would stay cold. When it snowed during the daytime, he would take his microscope outside and spread the velvet out on the stage and peer at any snowflakes that happened to fall on it. Daniel saw, as Hooke did, that each one was unique. But again Hooke saw something Daniel missed: 'in any particular snowflake, all six arms are the same – why does this happen? Why shouldn't each of the six arms develop in a different and unique shape?' 'Some central organizing principle must be at work, but – ?' Daniel said. 'That is too obvious to even bother pointing out,' Hooke said. 'With better lenses, we could peer into the core of a snowflake and discover that principle at work.' A week later, Hooke opened up the thorax of a live dog and removed all of its ribs to expose the beating heart. But the lungs had gone flaccid and did not seem to be doing their job. The screaming sounded almost human. A man with an expensive voice came down from John Comstock's house to enquire about it. Daniel, too bleary-eyed to see clearly and too weary to think, took him for a head butler or something. 'I shall write an explanation, and a note of apology to him,' Daniel mumbled, looking about for a quill, rubbing his blood-sticky hand on his breeches. 'To whom , prithee? asked the butler, amused. Though he seemed young for a head-butler. In his early thirties. He was in a linen night-dress. His scalp glistered with a fine carpet of blond stubble, the mark of a man who always wore a periwig. 'The Earl of Epsom.' 'Why not write it to the Duke of York?' 'Very well then, I'll write it to him.' 'Then why not dispense with writing altogether and simply tell me what the hell you are doing?' Daniel took this for insolence until he looked the visitor in the face and realized it was the Duke of York in person. He really ought to bow, or something. Instead of which he jerked. The Duke made a gesture with his hand that seemed to mean that the jerk was accepted as due obeisance and could they please get on with the conversation now. 'The Royal Society – ' Daniel began, thrusting that word Royal out in front of him like a shield, 'has brought a dead dog to life with another's blood, and has now embarked on a study of artificial breath. ' 'My brother is fond of your Society,' said James, 'or his Society I should say, for he made it Royal.' This, Daniel suspected, was to explain why he was not going to have them all horsewhipped. 'I do wonder at the noise. Is it expected to continue all night?' 'On the contrary, it has already ceased,' Daniel pointed out. The Lord High Admiral preceded him into the kitchen, where Hooke and Wilkins had thrust a brass pipe down the dog's windpipe and connected it to the same trusty pair of bellows they'd used to make the dead man's head speak. 'By pumping the bellows they were able to inflate and deflate the lungs, and prevent the dog from asphyxiating,' explained Charles Comstock, after the experimenters had bowed to the Duke. 'Now it only remains to be seen how long the animal can be kept alive in this way. Mr. Waterhouse and I shall spell each other at the bellows until Mr. Hooke pronounces an end to the experiment.' At the mention of Daniel's family name, the Duke flicked his eyes towards him for a moment. 'If it must suffer in the name of your inquiry, thank Heaven it does so quietly,' the Duke remarked, and turned to leave. The others would follow; but the Duke stopped them with a 'Do carry on, as you were.' But to Daniel he said, 'A word, if you please, Mr. Waterhouse,' and so Daniel escorted him out onto the lawn half wondering whether he was about to be carved up worse than the dog. A few moments previously, he'd mastered a daft impulse to tackle his royal highness before his royal highness reached the kitchen, for fear that his royal highness would be disgusted by what was going on in there. But he'd not reckoned on the fact that the Duke, young though he was, had fought in a lot of battles, both at sea and on land. Which was to say that as bad as this business with the dog was, the Duke of York had seen much worse done to humans. The R.S., far from seeming like a band of mad ruthless butchers, were dilettantes by his standards. Further grounds (as if any were wanted!) for Daniel to feel queasy. Daniel really knew of no way to regulate his actions other than to be rational. Princes were taught a thing or two about being rational, as they were taught to play a little lute and dance a passable ricercar. But what drove their actions was their own force of will; in the end they did as they pleased, rational or not. Daniel had liked to tell himself that rational thought led to better actions than brute force of will; yet here was the Duke of York all but rolling his eyes at them and their experiment, seeing naught that was new. 'A friend of mine brought back something nasty from France,' his royal highness announced. It took Daniel a long time to decrypt this. He tried to understand it in any number of different ways, but suddenly the knowledge rumbled through his mind like a peal of thunder through a coppice. The Duke had said: I have syphilis . 'Shame, that,' Daniel said. For he was not sure, yet, that he had translated it correctly. He must be ever so careful and vague lest this conversation degenerate into a comedy of errors ending with his death by rapier-thrust. 'Some are of the opinion that mercury cures it.' 'It is also a poison, though,' Daniel said. Which was common knowledge; but it seemed to confirm, in the mind of James Stuart, Duke of York and Lord High Admiral, that he was talking to just the right chap. 'Surely with so many clever Doctors in the Royal Society, working on artificial breath and such, there must be some thought of how to cure a man such as my friend.' And his wife and his children,Daniel thought, for James must have either gotten it from, or passed it on to, Anne Hyde, who had therefore probably given it to the daughters, Mary and Anne. To date, James's older brother the King had not been able to produce any legitimate children. There were plenty of bastards like Monmouth. But none eligible to inherit the throne. And so this nasty thing that James had brought back from France was really a matter of whether the Stuart dynasty was to survive. This raised a fascinating side question. With a whole cottage full of Royal Society Fellows to choose from, why had James carefully chosen to speak with the one who happened to be the son of a Phanatique? 'It is a sensitive matter,' the Duke remarked, 'the sort of thing that stains a man's honor, if it is bandied about.' Daniel readily translated this as follows: If you tell anyone, I'll send someone round to engage you in a duel.Not that anyone would pay any notice, anyway, if the son of Drake were to level an accusation of moral turpitude against the Duke of York. Drake had been doing such things without letup for fifty years. And so the Duke's strategy was now plain to Daniel: he had chosen Daniel to hear about his syphilis because if Daniel were so foolish as to spread rumors, no one would hear them above the roar of obloquy produced at all times by Drake. In any case, Daniel would not be able to keep it up for very long before he was found in a field outside of London with a lot of rapier wounds in his body. 'You will let me know, won't you, if the Royal Society learns anything on this front?' said James, making to leave. 'So that you can pass the information on to your friend? Of course,' Daniel said. Which was the end of that conversation. He returned to the kitchen to get an idea of how much longer the experiment was going to go on. The answer: longer than any of them really wanted. By the time they were finished, dawn-light was beginning to come in the windows, giving them a premonition of just how ghastly the kitchen was going to look when the sun actually rose. Hooke was sitting crookedly in a chair, shocked and morose, appalled by himself, and Wilkins was hunched forward supporting his head on a smeared fist. They'd come here supposedly as refugees from the Black Death, but really they were fleeing their own ignorance – they hungered for understanding, and were like starving wretches who had broken into a lord's house and gone on an orgy of gluttonous feasting, wolfing down new meals before they could digest, or even chew, the old ones. It had lasted for the better part of a year, but now, as the sun rose over the aftermath of the artificial breath experiment, they were scattered around, blinking stupidly at the devastated kitchen, with its dog-ribs strewn all over the floor, and huge jars of preserved spleens and gall-bladders, specimens of exotic parasites nailed to planks or glued to panes of glass, vile poisons bubbling over on the fire, and suddenly they felt completely disgusted with themselves. Daniel gathered the dog's remains up in his arms – messy, but it scarcely mattered – all their clothes would have to be burned anyway – and walked out to the bone-yard on the east side of the cottage, where the remains of all Hooke's and Wilkins's investigations were burned, buried, or used to study the spontaneous generation of flies. Notwithstanding which, the air was relatively clean and fresh out here. Having set the remains down, Daniel found that he was walking directly towards a blazing planet, a few degrees above the western horizon, which could only be Venus. He walked and walked, letting the dew on the grass cleanse the blood from his shoes. The dawn was making the fields shimmer pink and green. Isaac had sent him a letter: 'Require asst. w/obs. of Venus pls. come if you can.' He had wondered at the time if this might be something veiled. But standing there in that dew-silvered field with his back to the house of carnage and nothing before him but the Dawn Star, Daniel remembered what Isaac had said years ago about the natural harmony between the heavenly orbs and the orbs we view them with. Four hours later he was riding north on a borrowed horse. AboardMinerva, Plymouth Bay, Massachusetts NOVEMBER 1713 DANIEL WAKES UP WORRIED. The stiffness in his masseter muscles, the aching in his frontalis and temporalis, tells him he's been worrying about something in his sleep. Still, being worried is preferable to being terrified, which he was until yesterday, when Captain van Hoek finally gave up on the idea of trying to sail Minerva into the throat of a gale and turned back to calmer waters along the Massachusetts coast. Captain van Hoek would probably have called it 'a bit of chop' or some other nautical euphemism, but Daniel had gone to his cabin with a pail to catch his vomit, and an empty bottle to receive the notes he'd been scratching out in the last few days. If the weather had gotten any worse, he'd have tossed these down the head. Perhaps some Moor or Hottentot would have found them in a century or two and read about Dr. Waterhouse's early memories of Newton and Leibniz. The planks of the poop deck are only a few inches above Daniel's face as he lies on his sack of straw. He's learned to recognize the tread of van Hoek's boots on those boards. On a ship it is bad manners to approach within a fathom of the captain, so even when the poop deck is crowded, van Hoek's footsteps are always surrounded by a large empty space. As Minerva 's quest for a steady west wind has stretched out to a week and then two, Daniel has learned to read the state of the captain's mind from the figure and rhythm of his movements – each pattern like the steps of a courtly dance. A steady long stride means that all is well, and van Hoek is merely touring the precincts. When he's watching the weather he walks about in small eddies, and when he's shooting the sun with his back-staff he stands still, grinding the balls of his feet against the planks to keep his balance. But this morning (Daniel supposes it is early in the morning, though the sun hasn't come up yet) van Hoek is doing something Daniel's never observed before: flitting back and forth across the poop deck with brisk angry steps, pausing at one rail or another for a few seconds at a time. The sailors, he senses, are mostly awake, but they are all belowdecks shushing one another and tending to small, intense, quiet jobs. Yesterday they had sailed into Cape Cod Bay – the shallow lake held in the crook of Cape Cod's arm – to ride out the tail end of that northeast gale, and to make certain repairs, and get the ship more winter-ready than it had been. But then the wind shifted round to the north and threatened to drive them against the sand-banks at the southern fringe of said Bay, and so they sailed toward the sunset, and maneuvered the big ship with exquisite care between rocks to starboard and sunken islands to port, and thus entered Plymouth Bay. As night fell they dropped anchor in an inlet, well sheltered from the weather, and (as Daniel supposed) prepared to tarry there for a few days and await more auspicious weather. But van Hoek was obviously nervous – he doubled the watch, and put men to work cleaning and oiling the ship's surprisingly comprehensive arsenal of small firearms. A distant boom rattles the panes in Daniel's cabin window. He rolls out of bed like a fourteen-year-old and scurries to the exit, flailing one hand over his head in the dark so he won't brain himself on the overhead beam. When he emerges onto the quarter-deck he seems to hear answering fire from all the isles and hillside around them – then he understands that they are merely echoes of the first explosion. With a good pocket-watch he could map their surroundings by the timing of those echoes – Dappa, the first mate, sits crosslegged on the deck near the wheel, reviewing charts by candle-light. This is an odd place for such work. Diverse feathers and colored ribbons dangle from a string above his head – Daniel supposes it to be a tribal fetish (Dappa is an African) until a fleck of goose-down crawls in a breath of cold air, and he understands that Dappa is trying to guess what the wind will do as the sun rises. He holds up one hand to silence Daniel before Daniel's had a chance to speak. There is shouting on the water, but it is all distant – Minervais silent as a ghost ship. Stepping farther out onto the quarter-deck, Daniel can see yellow stars widely scattered across the water, blinking as they are eclipsed by rolling seas. 'You didn't know what you were getting yourself into,' Dappa observes. 'I'll rise to that bait – what have I gotten myself into?' 'You're on a ship whose captain refuses to have anything to do with pirates,' Dappa says. 'Hates 'em. He nailed his colors to the mast twenty years ago, van Hoek did – he would burn this ship to the waterline before handing over a single penny.' 'Those lights on the water – ' 'Whaleboats mostly,' Dappa says. 'Possibly a barge or two. When the sun comes up we may expect to see sails – but before we concern ourselves with those, we shall have to contend with the whaleboats. Did you hear the shouting, an hour ago?' 'I must have slept through it.' 'A whaleboat stole up towards us with muffled oars. We let her suppose that we were asleep – waited until she was alongside, then dropped a comet into her.' 'Comet?' 'A small cannonball, wrapped in oil-soaked rags and set aflame. Once it lands in such a boat, it's difficult to throw overboard. Gave us a good look, while it lasted: there were a dozen Englishmen in that boat, and one of 'em was already swinging a grappling-hook.' 'Do you mean that they were English colonists, or – ' 'That's one of the things we aim to find out. After we chased that lot off, we sent some men out in our own whaler.' 'The explosion – ?' “ 'Twas a grenade. We have a few retired grenadiers in our number – ' 'You threw a bomb into someone else's boat?' 'Aye, and then – if all went according to plan – our Filipinos – former pearl divers, excellent swimmers – climbed over the gunwales with daggers in their teeth and cut a few throats – ' 'But that's mad ! This is Massachusetts !' Dappa chuckles. 'Aye. That it is.' An hour later the sun rises gorgeously over Cape Cod Bay. Daniel is pacing around the ship, trying to find a place where he won't have to listen to the screams of the pirates. Two open boats are now thudding against Minerva 's hull: the ship's own longboat, freshly caulked and painted, and the pirate whaler, which was evidently in poor condition even before this morning's action. Splinters of fresh blond wood show where a bench was snapped by the grenade, and an inch or two of blood sloshes back and forth in the bottom as the empty boat is tossed around by a rising wind. Five pirates survived, and were towed back to Minerva by the raiding party. Now (judging from the sounds) they are all down in the bilge, where two of Minerva 's largest sailors are holding their heads beneath the filthy water. When they are hauled out, they scream for air, and Daniel thinks about Hooke and Wilkins with their poor dogs. Woolsthorpe, Lincolnshire SPRING 1666 He discovereth the depe & secret things: he knoweth what is in the darkenes, and the light dwelleth with him. – Daniel 2:22 FROM ISAAC'S INSTRUCTIONS (“Turn left at Grimethorpe Ruin') he'd been expecting a few hovels gripping the rim of a windburned scarp, but Woolsthorpe was as pleasant a specimen of English countryside as he'd ever seen. North of Cambridge it was appallingly flat, a plain scratched with drainage ditches. But beyond Peterborough the coastal fens fell away and were replaced by pastures of radiant greenness, like stained-glass windows infested with sheep. There were a few tall pine trees that made the place seem farther north than it really was. Another day north, the country began to roll, and the earth turned brown as coffee, with cream-colored stone rising out of the soil here and there: once-irregular croppings rationalized to squared-off block-heaps by the efforts of quarrymen. Woolsthorpe gave an impression of being high up in the world, close to the sky, and the trees that lined the lane from the village all had the same telltale skewage, suggesting that the place might not be as pleasant all year round as it was on the morning Daniel arrived. Woolsthorpe Manor was a very simple house, shaped like a fat T with its crossbar fronting on the lane, made of the soft pale stone that was used for everything around here – its roof a solid mass of lichens. It was built sideways to a long slope that rose as it went northwards, and so, on its southern end, the land fell away from it, giving it a clear sunny exposure. But this opportunity had been wasted by the builders, who had put almost no windows there – just a couple of them, scarcely larger than gun-slits, and one tiny portal up in the attic that made no sense to Daniel at first. As Daniel noted while his horse toiled up the hill through the grasping spring mud, Isaac had already taken advantage of this south-facing wall by carving diverse sundials into it. Sprawling away from there, down the hill and away from the lane, were long stables and barns that marked the place as an active farmstead, and that Daniel didn't have to concern himself with. He turned off the lane. The house was set back from it not more than twenty feet. Set above the door was a coat of arms carved into the stone: on a blank shield, a pair of human thigh-bones crossed. A Jolly Roger, minus skull. Daniel sat on his horse and contemplated its sheer awfulness for a while and savored the dull, throbbing embarrassment of being English. He was waiting for a servant to notice his arrival. Isaac had mentioned in his letter that his mother was away for a few weeks, and this was perfectly acceptable to Daniel – all he knew of the mother was that she had abandoned Isaac when he'd been three years old, and gone to live with a rich new husband several miles away, leaving the toddler to be raised in this house by his grandmother. Daniel had noticed that there were some families (like the Waterhouses) skilled at presenting a handsome façade to the world, no matter what was really going on; it was all lies, of course, but at least it was a convenience to visitors. But there were other families where the emotional wounds of the participants never healed, never even closed up and scabbed over, and no one even bothered to cover them up – like certain ghastly effigies in Papist churches, with exposed bleeding hearts and gushing stigmata. Having dinner or even polite conversation with them was like sitting around the table participating in Hooke's dog experiment – everything you did or said was another squeeze of the bellows, and you could stare right in through the vacancies in the rib cage and see the organs helplessly responding, the heart twitching with its own macabre internal power of perpetual motion. Daniel suspected that the Newtons were one of those families, and he was glad Mother was absent. Their coat of arms was a proof, of Euclidean certainty, that he was right about this. 'Is that you, Daniel?' said the voice of Isaac Newton, not very loud. A little bubble of euphoria percolated into Daniel's bloodstream: to re-encounter anyone, after so long, during the Plague Years, and find them still alive, was a miracle. He looked uphill. The northern end of the house looked into, and was sheltered by, rising terrain. A small orchard of apple trees had been established on that side. Seated on a bench, with his back to Daniel and to the sun, was a man or woman with long colorless hair spilling down over a blanket that had been drawn round the shoulders like a shawl. 'Isaac?' The head turned slightly. 'It is I.' Daniel rode up out of the mud and into the apple-garden, then dismounted and tethered the horse to the low branch of an apple tree – a garland of white flowers. The petals were coming down from the apple-blossoms like snow. Daniel swung round Isaac in a wide Copernican arc, peering at him through the fragrant blizzard. Isaac's hair had always been pale, and prematurely streaked with gray, but in the year since Daniel had seen him, he'd gone almost entirely silver. The hair fell about him like a hood – as Daniel came around to the front, he was expecting to see Isaac's protruding eyes, but instead he saw two disks of gold looking back at him, as if Isaac's eyes had been replaced by five-guinea coins. Daniel must have shouted, because Isaac said, 'Don't be alarmed. I fashioned these spectacles myself. I'm sure you know that gold is almost infinitely malleable – but did you know that if you pound it thin enough, you can see through it? Try them.' He took the spectacles off with one hand while clamping the other over his eyes. Daniel bobbled them because they were lighter than he'd expected – they had no lenses, just membranes of gold stretched like drum-heads over wire frames. As he raised them towards his face, their color changed. 'They are blue!' 'It is another clue about the nature of light,' Isaac said. 'Gold is yellow – it reflects the part of light that is yellow, that is, but allows the remnant to pass through – which being deprived of its yellow part, appears blue.' Daniel was peering out at a dim vision of blue-blossomed apple trees before a blue stone house – a blue Isaac Newton sitting with his back to a blue sun, one blue hand covering his eyes. 'Forgive me their rude construction – I made them in the dark.' 'Is there something the matter with your eyes, Isaac?' 'Nothing that cannot heal, God willing. I have been staring into the sun too much.' 'Oh.' Daniel was semi-dumbstruck by Puritan guilt for having left Isaac alone for so long. It was fortunate he hadn't killed himself. 'I can still work in a dark room, with the spectra that are cast through the prism by the Sun. But the spectra of Venus are too faint.' 'Of Venus ?!' 'I have made observations concerning the nature of Light that contradict the theories of Descartes, Boyle, and Huygens,' Isaac said. 'I have divided the white light of the Sun into colors, and then recombined these rays to make white light again. I have done the experiment many times, changing the apparatus to rule out possible sources of error. But there is one I have yet to eliminate: the Sun is not a point source of light. Its face subtends a considerable arc in the heavens. Those who will seek to find fault with my work, and to attack me, will claim that this – the fact that the light entering my prism, from different parts of the Sun's disk, strikes it from slightly different angles – renders my conclusions suspect, and therefore worthless. In order to defeat these objections I must repeat the experiments using light, not from the Sun, but from Venus – an almost infinitely narrow point of light. But the light from Venus is so faint that my burned eyes cannot see it. I need you to make the observations with your good eyes, Daniel. We begin tonight. Perhaps you'd care to take a nap?' The house was divided in half, north/south: the northern part, which had windows but no sunlight, was the domain of Newton's mother – a parlor on the ground floor and a bedchamber above it, both furnished in the few-but-enormous style then mandatory. The southern half – with just a few tiny apertures to admit the plentiful sunlight – was Isaac's: on the ground floor, a kitchen with a vast walk-in fireplace, suitable for alchemical work, and above it a bedchamber. Isaac persuaded Daniel to lie down in, or at least on, his mother's bed for a bit of a nap – then made the mistake of mentioning that it was the same bed in which Isaac had been born, several weeks premature, twenty-four years earlier. So after half an hour of lying in that bed, as rigid as a tetanus victim, looking out between his feet at the first thing Isaac had ever laid eyes on (the window and the orchard), Daniel got up and went outside again. Isaac was still sitting on the bench with a book in his lap, but his gold spectacles were aimed at the horizon. 'Defeated them soundly, I should say.' 'I beg your pardon?' 'When it started it was close to shore – but it has steadily moved away.' 'What on earth can you you talking about, Isaac?' 'The naval battle – we are fighting the Dutch in the Narrow Seas. Can you not hear the sound of the cannons?' 'I've been lying quietly in bed and heard nothing.' 'Out here, it is very distinct.' Isaac reached out and caught a fluttering petal. 'The winds favor our Navy. The Dutch chose the wrong time to attack.' A fit of dizziness came over Daniel just then. Partly it was the thought that James, Duke of York, who a couple of weeks ago had been standing arm's length from Daniel discoursing of syphilis, at this moment stood on the deck of a flagship, firing on, and taking fire from, the Dutch fleet; and the booms rolled across the sea and were gathered in by the great auricle of the Wash, the Boston and the Lynn Deeps, the Long Sand and the Brancaster Roads perhaps serving as the greased convolutions of an ear, and propagated up the channel of the Welland, fanned out along its tributary rivers and rills into the swales and hills of Lincolnshire and into the ears of Isaac. It was partly that, and partly the vision that filled his eyes: thousands of white petals were coming off the apple trees and following the same diagonal path to the ground, their descent skewed by a breeze that was blowing out toward the sea. 'Do you remember when Cromwell died, and Satan's Wind came along to carry his soul to Hell?' Isaac asked. 'Yes. I was marching in his funeral procession, watching old Puritans getting blown flat.' 'I was in the schoolyard. We happened to be having a broad-jumping competition. I won the prize, even though I was small and frail. In fact, perhaps I won because I was so – I knew that I should have to use my brains. I situated myself so that Satan's Wind was at my back, and then timed my leap so that I left the ground during an especially powerful gust. The wind carried my little body through space like one of these petals. For a moment I was gripped by an emotion – part thrill and part terror – as I imagined that the wind might carry me away – that my feet might never touch the earth again – that I would continue to skim along, just above the ground, until I had circumnavigated the globe. Of course I was just a boy. I didn't know that projectiles rise and fall in parabolic curves. Be those curves ever so flat, they always tend to earth again. But suppose a cannonball, or a boy caught up in a supernatural wind, flew so fast that the centrifugal force (as Huygens has named it) of his motion around the earth just counteracted his tendency to fall?' 'Er – depends on what you assume about the nature of falling,' Daniel said. 'Why do we fall? In what direction?' 'We fall towards the center of the earth. The same center on which the centrifugal force pivots – like a rock whirled on the end of a string.' 'I suppose that if, somehow, you could get the forces to balance just so, you'd keep going round and round, and never fall or fly away. But it seems terrifically improbable – God would have to set it up just so – as He set the planets in their orbits.' 'If you make certain assumptions about the force of gravity, and how the weight of an object diminishes as it gets farther away, it's not improbable at all,' Isaac said. 'It just happens.You would keep going round and round forever.' 'In a circle?' 'An ellipse.' 'An ellipse . . .' and here the bomb finally went off in his head, and Daniel had to sit down on the ground, the moisture of last year's fallen apples soaking through his breeches. 'Like a planet.' 'Just so – if only we could jump fast enough, or had a strong enough wind at our backs, we could all be planets.' It was so pure and obviously Right that it did not occur to Daniel to question Isaac about the details for several hours, as the Sun was going down, and they were preparing for Venus to wheel round into the southern sky. 'I have developed a method of fluxions that renders it all perfectly obvious,' Isaac said. Daniel's first thought had been I have to tell Wilkins because Wilkins, who had written a novel in which men flew to the moon, would be delighted with Isaac's phrase: We could all be planets.But that put him in mind of Hooke, and the experiment at the deep well. Some premonition told him that he had best keep Newton and Hooke in separate cells for now. Isaac's bedroom might have been designed specifically for doing prism experiments, because one wanted an opening just big enough to admit a ray of light in which to center the prism, but otherwise the room needed to be dark so that the spectrum could be clearly viewed where it struck the wall. The only drawback for Daniel was stumbling over debris. This was the room where Isaac had lived in the years before going to Cambridge. Daniel inferred that they had been lonely years. The floor was cluttered with stuff Isaac had made but been too busy to throw away, and the white plaster walls were covered with graffiti he had sketched with charcoal or scratched with nails: designs for windmills, depictions of birds, geometrickal proofs. Daniel shuffled through the darkness, never lifting a foot off the floor lest it come down on an old piece of doll-furniture or jagged remains of a lens-grinding experiment, the delicate works of a water-clock or the papery skull of a small animal, or a foamy crucible crowned with frozen drips of metal. Isaac had worked out during which hours of the night Venus would be shining her perfectly unidirectional light on Woolsthorpe Manor's south wall, and he'd done it not only for tonight but for every night in the next several weeks. All of those hours were spoken for: he had planned out a whole program of experiments. It was clear to Daniel that Isaac had been arguing his case against a whole court full of imaginary Jesuits hurling Latin barbs at him from every quarter, objecting to his methods in ways that were often ridiculous – that Isaac fancied himself as a combination of Galileo and St. Anne, but that unlike Galileo he had no intention of knuckling under, and unlike St. Anne he would not end up riddled with his tormentors' arrows – he was getting ready to catch the arrows, and fling them back. It was the sort of thing that Hooke never bothered with – because for Hooke being right was enough, and he didn't care what anyone else thought of him or his ideas. When Isaac had got his prisms situated in the window and blown out the candle, Daniel was blind, and painfully embarrassed, for several minutes – he was anxious that, lacking Isaac's acute senses, he would not be able to see the spectrum cast against the wall by the light shining from Venus. 'Have due patience,' Isaac said with a tenderness Daniel hadn't heard from him in years. The thought stole upon Daniel, as he sat there in the dark with Isaac, that Isaac might have more than one reason for wearing those golden spectacles all the time. They shielded his burnt eyes from the light, yes. But as well, might they hide his burnt heart from the sight of Daniel? Then Daniel noticed a multicolored blur on the wall – a sliver, red on one end and violet on the other. He said, 'I have it.' He was startled by a heavy rustling directly above them, in the attic, a scrabbling of claws. 'What was that?' 'There is a tiny window up there – an invitation for owls to build nests in the attic,' Isaac said. 'So vermin don't eat the grain stored up there.' Daniel laughed at it. For a moment he and Isaac were boys up past bedtime playing with their toys, the complications of their past forgotten and the perils of the future unthought of. A deep hooing noise, like the resonant tone of an organ pipe. Then the rustle of feathers as the bird squeezed through the opening, and the rhythm of powerful wings, like the beating of a heart, receding into the sky. The spectrum of Venus flashed off, then on, as the owl momentarily eclipsed the planet. When Daniel looked, he realized that he could now see not only the spectrum from Venus, but tiny, ghostly streaks of color all over the wall: the spectra cast by the stars that surrounded Venus in the southern sky. But spectra were all he could see. The earth spun and the ribbons of color migrated across the invisible wall, an inch a minute, pouring across the rough plaster like shining puddles of quicksilver driven before a steady wind, revealing, in gorgeous colors, tiny strips of the pictures that Isaac had drawn and scratched on those walls. Each of the little rainbows showed only a fragment of a picture, and each picture in turn was only part of Isaac's tapestry of sketchings and scratchings, but Daniel supposed that if he stood there through a sufficient number of long cold nights and concentrated very hard, he might be able to assemble, in his mind, a rough conception of the entire thing. Which was the way he had to address Isaac Newton in any case. But I did believe, and do still, that the end of our City will be with fire and brimstone from above, and therefore I have made mine escape. – JOHN BUNYAN, The Pilgrim's Progress CAMBRIDGE TRIED TO RESUME that spring, but Daniel and Isaac had only just settled back into their chamber when someone died of the Plague and they had to move out again – Isaac back to Woolsthorpe, Daniel back to a wandering life. He spent some weeks with Isaac working on the colors experiment, others with Wilkins (now back in London, running regular meetings of the Royal Society again) working on the Universal Character manuscript, others with Drake or with his older half-siblings, who'd returned to London at Drake's command, to await the Apocalypse. The Year of the Beast, 1666, was halfway through, then two-thirds. Plague had gone away. War continued, and it was more than just an Anglo-Dutch war now, for the French had made a league with the Dutch against the English. But whatever plans the Duke of York had hatched with his Admirals on that chilly day at Epsom must not have been altogether worthless, because it was going well for them. Drake must be torn between patriotic ardor, and a feeling of disappointment that it showed no sign whatever of developing into an Armageddon sort of war. It was merely a string of naval engagements, and the gist of it was that the English fleet was driving the Dutch and French from the Channel. All in all, there was a failure of events to match up with the program laid out in the Books of Daniel and of Revelation, which forced Drake to re-read them almost every day, working out interpretations new and ever more strained. For Daniel's part, he sometimes went for days without thinking about the End of the World at all. One evening early in September he was riding back toward London from the north. He'd been up in Woolsthorpe helping Isaac run the numbers on his planetary orbit theory, but with inconclusive results, because they did not know exactly how far from the center of the Earth they were when they stood on the ground and weighed things. He had stopped in at that plague-ridden town of Cambridge to fetch a new book that claimed to specify the crucial figure: how big around was the Earth? and now he was going down to visit his father, who'd sent him an alarming letter, claiming that he had just calculated a different crucial figure: the exact date (early in September, as it happened) that the world would end. Daniel was still twenty miles outside of the city, riding along in the late afternoon, when a messenger came galloping up the road toward him and shouted, 'London has been burning for a day and is burning still!' as he hurtled past. Daniel knew this, in a way, but he had been denying it. The air had had a burnt smell about it all day long, and a haze of smoke had clung about the trees and the sheltered hollows in the fields. The sun had been a glaring patch that seemed to fill half the southern sky. Now, as the day went on and it sank toward the horizon, it turned orange and then red, and began to limn vast billows and towers of smoke – portents and omens that seemed incomparably vaster than the (still unknown) radius of the Earth. Daniel rode into the night, but not into darkness. A vault of orange light had been thrown about a mile high up into the sky above London. Thuds propagated through the earth – at first he supposed they must be the impacts of buildings falling down, but then they began coming in slow premeditated onslaughts and he reckoned that they must be blowing up whole buildings with powder-kegs, trying to gouge fire-breaks through the city. At first he'd thought it was impossible for any fire to reach as far as Drake's house outside of town on Holborn, but the number of explosions, the diameter of the arch of light, told him nothing was safe. He was working upstream against a heavy traffic of soot-faced wretches now. It made for slow going, but there was nothing to do about it. The folds of his clothing, and even the porches of his ears, were collecting black grit, nodules and splinters and flakes of charcoal that rained down tickingly on everything. 'Cor, look, it's snowing!' exclaimed a boy with his face turned upwards to catch reflected light. Daniel – not wanting to see it, really – raised his eyes slowly, and found the sky filled with some kind of loose chaff, swirling in slow vortices here and there but heading generally downwards. He grabbed a piece of it from the air: it was page 798 of a Bible, all charred round the margins. He reached again and snared a hand-written leaf from a goldsmith's account-book, still glowing at one corner. Then a handbill – a libel attacking Free Coinage. A personal letter from one Lady to another. They accumulated on his shoulders like falling leaves and he stopped reading them after a while. It took so long to get there that when he actually saw a house burning by the roadside, he was shocked. Solid beams of flame protruded from the windows, silhouetting people with leather buckets, jewels of water spinning off their rims. Refugees had flooded the fields along Gray's Inn Road and, tired of watching the fire, had begun throwing up shelters out of whatever stuff they could find. Not far from Holborn, the road was nearly blocked by a rampart of shattered masonry that had spilled across it when buildings to either side had been blown up – even above the smell of burning London, Daniel could detect the brimstone-tang of the gunpowder. Then a building just to his right exploded – to Daniel, an instant's warning, a yellow flare in the corner of his eye, and then gravel embedded in one side of his face (but it felt like that side of his head had simply been sheared off) and deafness. His horse bolted and instantly broke a leg in the rubble-pile, then threw Daniel off – he came down hard on stones and splinters, and got up after lying there for he had no idea how long. There had been more explosions, coming faster now as the main front of the fire drew closer, its heat drawing curtains of steam and smoke out of walls, rooves, and the clothing on the living and dead persons in the street. Daniel took advantage of the fire's light to stumble over the rubble-wall and into a stretch of the road that was still clear, but doomed to burn. Reaching Holborn, he turned his back to the fire and ran toward the sound of the explosions. Some part of his mind had been doing geometry through all of this, plotting the points of the explosions and extrapolating them, and he was more and more certain that the curve was destined to pass near Drake's house. There was another rubble-heap on Holborn, so fresh that it was still sledding toward its angle of repose. Daniel charged up it, almost afraid to look down lest he should discover Drake's furniture beneath his feet. But from the top of the heap he obtained a perfect view of Drake's house, still standing, but standing alone now, in a sag-shouldered posture, as the houses to either side of it had been blown up. The walls had begun to smoke, and fire-brands were raining down around it like meteors, and Drake Waterhouse was up on the roof holding a Bible above his head with both hands. He was bellowing something that could not be heard, and did not need to be. The street below was crowded with an uncommon number of Gentlemen, and better, brandishing swords – their gay courtiers' clothing burnt and blackened – and musketeers, too, looking somewhat unhappy to be standing in such a place with containers of gunpowder strapped to their midsections. Very wealthy and prominent men were looking up at Drake, shouting and pointing at the street, insisting he come down. But Drake had eyes only for the fire. Daniel turned round to see what his father was seeing, and was nearly slapped to the ground by the heat and the spectacle of it – the Fire. Everything between East and South was flame, and everything below the stars. It fountained and throbbed, jetted and pulsed, and buildings went down beneath it as blades of grass beneath John Wilkins's giant Wheel. And it was approaching, so fast that it overtook some persons who were trying to run away from it – they were blurring into ghosts of smoke and bursting into flames, their sprinting forms dissolving into light: the Rapture. This had not escaped Drake's notice – he was pointing at it – but the crowd of Court fops below were not interested. To Drake, these particular men had been demons from Hell even before London had caught fire, because they were the personal bootlicks of King Charles II, an arch-daemon of King Louis XIV himself. Now, here they were, perversely convened in front of his house. Daniel had been waving his arms over his head trying to get Drake's attention, but he understood now that he must be an indistinct black shape against a vast glare, the least interesting thing in Drake's panorama. All of the courtiers had turned inward, attent on the same man – even Drake was looking at him. Daniel caught sight of the Lord Mayor, and thought perhaps he was the center of attention – but the Lord Mayor had eyes only to look at another. Sidestepping to a new position on the heap, Daniel finally saw a tall dark man in impossibly glorious clothing and a vast wig, which was shaking from side to side in exasperation. This man suddenly moved forward, seized a torch from a toady, looked up one last time at Drake, then bent down and touched the fire to the street. A bright smoking star rolled across the pavement toward Drake's front door, which had been smashed open. The man with the torch turned around, and Daniel recognized him as England. There was a kind of preliminary explosion of humanity away from the house. Courtiers and musketeers formed a crowd behind the King to shield his back from flying harpsichords. Up on the roof, Drake aimed a finger at His Majesty and raised his Bible on high to call down some fresh damnation. From the burning timbers that were now coming down from Heaven like flaming spears hurled by avenging angels, he might have thought, in these moments, that he'd played an important part in Judgment Day. But nothing hit the King. The spark was climbing the front steps. Daniel plunged forward down the piled house-guts, because he was fairly certain that he could outrun the spark, reach the fuse, and jerk it loose before it touched whatever powder-kegs had been rolled into Drake's parlor. His path was blocked by members of the King's personal bodyguard who were running the other way. They looked at Daniel curiously while Daniel changed course to swing round them. In the corner of his eye he saw one of them understand what Daniel was doing – that slackening of the face, the opening of the features, that came over the faces of students when, suddenly, they knew. This man stepped clear from the group and raised a yawning tube to his shoulder. Daniel looked at his father's house and saw the star snaking down the dark hallway. He was tense for the explosion, but it came from behind him – at the same moment he was bitten in a hundred places and slammed face-down into the street. He rolled over on his back, trying to snuff the fires of pain burning all over him, and saw his father ascending into heaven, his black clothes changing into a robe of fire. His table, books, and grandfather clock were not far behind. 'Father?' he said. Which was senseless, if the only kind of sense you heeded was that of Natural Philosophy. Even supposing Drake was alive at the moment Daniel spoke to him – a daring supposition indeed, and not the sort of thing that contributed to a young man's reputation in the Royal Society – he was far away, and getting farther, washed in apocalyptic roar and tumult, beset by many distractions, and probably deaf from the blast. But Daniel had just seen his house exploded and been shot with a blunderbuss in the same instant, and all sense of the Natural-Philosophic kind had fled from him. All that remained to shape his actions was the sentimental logic of a five-year-old bewildered that his father seemed to be leaving him: which was hardly the natural and correct order of things. Moreover, Daniel had another twenty years' important things to say to his father. He had sinned against Drake and would make confession and be absolved, and Drake had sinned against him and must needs be brought to account. Determined to put a stop to this heinous, unnatural leaving, he used the only means of self-preservation that God had granted to five-year-olds: the voice. Which by itself did naught but wiggle air. In a loving home, that could raise alarms and summon help. 'Father?' he tried again. But his home was a storm of bricks and a spray of timbers, each tracing its own arc to the smoking and steaming earth, and his father was a glowing cloud. Like a theophany of the Old Testament. But whereas fiery clouds were for YHWH a manifestation, a means of revealing Himself to His children below, this one swallowed Drake up and did not spit him out but made him one with the Mysterium Tremendum. He was hidden from Daniel now forever. AboardMinerva, Plymouth Bay, Massachusetts NOVEMBER 1713 HIS MIND HAS QUITE RUN ahead of his quill; his pen has gone dry, but his face is damp. Alone in his cabin, Daniel indulges himself for a minute in another favorite pastime of five-year-olds. Some say that crying is childish. Daniel – who since the birth of Godfrey has had more opportunities than he should have liked to observe crying – takes a contrary view. Crying loudly is childish, in that it reflects a belief, on the cryer's part, that someone is around to hear the noise, and come a-running to make it all better. Crying in absolute silence, as Daniel does this morning, is the mark of the mature sufferer who no longer nurses, nor is nursed by, any such comfortable delusions. There's a rhythmical chant down on the gundeck that slowly builds and then explodes into a drumming of many feet on mahogany stair-steps, and suddenly Minerva 's deck is crowded with sailors, running about and colliding with each other, like a living demonstration of Hooke's ideas about heat. Daniel wonders if perhaps a fire has been noticed down in the powder-magazine, and the sailors have all come up to abandon ship. But this is a highly organized sort of panic. Daniel pats his face dry, stoppers his ink-well, and goes out onto the quarter-deck, chucking his ink-caked quill overboard. Most of the sailors have already ascended into the rigging, and begun to drop vast white curtains as if to shield landlubber Daniel's eyes from the fleet of sloops and whaleboats that seems now to be converging on them from every cove and inlet on Plymouth Bay. Rocks and trees ashore are moving, with respect to fixed objects on Minerva, in a way that they shouldn't. 'We're moving – we are adrift!' he protests. Weighing anchor on a ship of Minerva 's bulk is a ludicrously complicated and lengthy procedure – a small army of chanting sailors pursuing one another round the giant capstan on the upperdeck, boys scrubbing slime off, and sprinkling sand onto, the wet anchor cable to afford a better purchase for the messenger cable – an infinite loop, passed three times round the capstan, that nimble-fingered riggers are continually lashing alongside the anchor cable in one place and unlashing in another. None of this has even begun to happen in the hour since the sun rose. 'We are adrift!' Daniel insists to Dappa, who's just vaulted smartly off the edge of the poop deck and nearly landed on Daniel's shoulders. 'But naturally, Cap'n – we're all in a panic, don't you see?' 'You are being unduly harsh on yourself and your crew, Dappa – and why are you addressing me as Captain? And how can we be adrift, when we haven't weighed anchor?' 'You're wanted on the poop deck, Cap'n – that's right, just step forward – ' 'Let me fetch my hat.' 'None of it, Cap'n, we want every pirate in New England – for they're all out there, at the moment – to see your white hair shining in the sun, your bald pate, pale and pink, like that of a Cap'n who ain't been abovedecks in years – this way, mind the wheel, sir – that's right – could you dodder just a bit more? Squint into the unaccustomed sunlight – well played, Cap'n!' 'May the Good Lord save us, Mr. Dappa, we've lost our anchors! Some madman has cut the anchor cables!' 'I told you we were in a panic – steady up the stairs, there, Cap'n!' 'Let go my arm! I'm perfectly capable of – ' 'Happy to be of service, Cap'n – as is that lopsided Dutchman at the top o' the stairs – ' 'Captain van Hoek! Why are you dressed as an ordinary seaman!? And what has become of our anchors!?' 'Dead weight,' van Hoek says, and then goes on to mutter something in Dutch. 'He said, you are showing just the sort of impotent choler that we need. Here, take a spyglass! I've an idea – why don't you peer into the wrong end of it first – then look befuddled, and angry, as if some subordinate had stupidly reversed the lenses.' 'I'll have you know, Mr. Dappa, that at one time I knew as much of opticks as any man alive, save one – possibly two, if you count Spinoza – but he was only a practical lens-grinder, and generally more concerned with atheistical ruminations – ' 'Do it!' grunts the one-armed Dutchman. He is still the captain, so Daniel steps to the railing of the poop deck, raises the spyglass, and peers through the objective lens. He can actually hear pirates on distant whaleboats laughing at him. Van Hoek plucks the glass from Daniel, spins it around on the knuckles of his only hand, and thrusts it at him. Daniel accepts it and tries to hold it steady on an approaching whaler. But the forward end of that boat is fogged in a bank of smoke, rapidly dispersing in the freshening breeze. For the last few minutes, Minerva 's sails have been inflating, frequently with brisk snapping noises, almost like gunshots – but – 'Damn me,' he says, 'they fired on us!' He can see, now, the swivel-gun mounted in the whaleboat's prow, an unsavory-looking fellow feeding a neatly bound cluster of lead balls into its small muzzle. 'Just a shot across the bow,' Dappa says. 'That panicky look on your face – the gesticulating – perfect!' 'The number of boats is incredible:are these all pirating together ?' 'Plenty of time for explanations later – now's the moment to look stricken – perhaps get wobbly in the knees and clutch your chest like an apoplectic – we'll assist you to your cabin on the upperdeck.' 'But my cabin, as you know, is on the quarter-deck . . .' 'Today only, you're being given a complimentary upgrade – Cap'n. Come on, you've been in the sun too long – best retire and break open a bottle of rum.' 'DON'T BE MISLED BY THESE exchanges of cannon-fire,' Dappa reassures him, thrusting his woolly and somewhat grizzled head into the Captain's cabin. 'If this were a true fight, sloops and whaleboats'd be simply exploding all round us.' 'Well, if it's not a fight, what would you call it when men on ships shoot balls of lead at each other?' 'A game – a dance. A theatrickal performance. Speaking of which – have you practiced your role recently?' 'Didn't seem safe, when grapeshot was flying – but – as it's only an entertainment – well . . .' Daniel gets up from his squatting position underneath the Captain's chart-table and sidles over toward the windows, moving in a sort of Zeno's Paradox mode – each step only half as long as the previous. Van Hoek's cabin is as broad as the entire stern of the ship – two men could play at shuttlecocks in here. The entire aft bulkhead is one gently curved window commanding (now that Daniel's in position to see through it) a view of Plymouth Bay: wee cabins and wigwams on the hills, and, on the waves, numerous scuttling boats all flocked with gunpowder-smoke, occasionally thrusting truncated bolts of yellow fire in their general direction. 'The critical reaction seems hostile,' Daniel observes. Off to his left, a small pane gets smashed out of its frame by what he takes to have been a musket-ball. 'Excellent cringing! The way you raise your hands as if to clap them over your ears, then arrest them in midair, as if already seized in rigor mortis:thank God you were delivered into our hands.' 'I am meant to believe that all of these goings-on are nothing more than an elaborate manipulation of the pirates' mental state?' 'No need to be haughty – theydo it to us , too. Half of the cannon on those boats are carved out of logs, painted to look real.' A large meteor-like something blows the head door off its hinges and buries itself in an oaken knee-brace, knocking it askew and bending the entire cabin slightly out of shape – wreaking some sort of parallelogram effect on Daniel's Frame o' Reference, so it appears that Dappa's now standing up at an angle – or perhaps the ship's beginning to heel over. 'Some of the cannon are, of course, real,' Dappa admits before Daniel can score any points there. 'If we are playing with the pirates' minds, what is the advantage in making the ship's captain out as a senile poltroon – which, if I may read ‘tween the lines, would appear to be my role? Why not fling open every gunport, run out every cannon, make the hills ring with broadsides, set van Hoek up on the poop waving his hook in the air?' 'We'll get round to all that later, in all likelihood. For now we must pursue a multilayered bluffing strategy.' “Why?' 'Because we have more than one group of pirates to contend with.' “What!?' 'This is why we captured and questioned – ' ' Somewould say tortured – ' “ – several pirates before dawn. There are simply too many pirates in this Bay to make sense. Some of them would appear to be mutually hostile. Indeed, we've learned that the traditional, honest, hardworking Plymouth Bay pirates – the ones in the small boats – get over, Cap'n, I say! Two paces over to larboard, if you please!' Dappa's adverting on something outside the window. Daniel turns round to see a taut manila line dangling vertically just outside – not an unusual sight in and of itself, but it wasn't there a few seconds ago. The stretched line shudders, tattooing a beat on the window-pane. A pair of blistered hands appears, then a broad-brimmed hat, then a head with a dagger clenched in its teeth. Then behind Daniel a tremendous FOOM while something unsightly happens to the climber's face – clearly visible through a suddenly absent pane. A gout of smoke roils and rebounds against the panes that are still there, and by the time it's cleared away the pirate is gone. Dappa's in the middle of the cabin holding a hot smoky shooting-iron. He rummages in van Hoek's chest and pulls out a hook with various straps and stump-cups all a-dangle. 'That was one of the sort I was speaking of. Never would've tried anything so foolhardy if the newer breed hadn't brought such hard times down on 'em.' 'What newer breed?' Dappa, wearing a fastidious and disgusted look, threads the hook out through the missing window-pane and catches the dangling pirate-rope, then draws it inside the cabin and severs it with a smart swing of his cutlass. 'Lift your head toward the horizon, Cap'n, and behold the flotilla of coasting craft – sloops and topsail schooners, and a ketch – that is forming up there in Plymouth Bay. Half a dozen or more vessels. Strange information glancing from one to the next embodied in pennants, guns, and flashes of sunlight.' 'It is because of them that the riffraff in the small craft cannot make a living?' 'Just so, Cap'n. Now, if we'd put up a brave front, as you suggested, they'd've known their cause was hopeless, and might've been tempted to make common cause with Teach.' 'Teach?' 'Cap'n Edward Teach, the Admiral of yonder pirate-fleet. But as it is, these small-timers have spent themselves in a futile try at seizing Minerva before Teach could make sail and form up. Now we can address the Teach matter separately.' 'There was a Teach in the Royal Navy – ' 'He is the same fellow. He and his men fought on the Queen's side in the War, helping themselves to Spanish shipping. Now that the treaty is signed and we are friendly with Spain, these fellows are at loose ends, and have crossed the Atlantic to seek a home port for American piracy.' 'So I ween it's not our cargo that Teach wants, so much as – ' 'If we threw every last bale overboard, still he would come after us. He wants Minerva for his flagship. And a mighty raider she would be.' There's been no gunfire recently, so Daniel crosses over to the window and watches sail after sail unfurling, Teach's fleet developing into a steady cloud on the bay. 'They look like fast ships,' he says. 'We'll be seeing Teach soon.' 'He's easily recognized – according to them we questioned, he's a master of piratical performances. Wears smoking punks twined about his head, like burning dreadlocks, and, at night, burning tapers in his thick black beard. He's got half the people in Plymouth convinced he's the Devil incarnate.' 'What think you, Dappa?' 'I think there never was a Devil so fierce as Cap'n van Hoek, when pirates are after his Lady.' Charing Cross Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) september 1686 I find that men (as high as trees) will write Dialogue-wise; yet no man doth them slight For writing so; indeed if they abuse Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use To that intent; but yet let truth be free To make her sallies upon thee, and me, Which way it pleases God. – John Bunyan, The Pilgrim's Progress Dramatis Personae DANIEL WATERHOUSE , a Puritan. SIR RICHARD APTHORP, a former Goldsmith, proprietor of Apthorp's Bank. A DUTCHMAN. A JEW. ROGER COMSTOCK, Marquis of Ravenscar, a courtier. JACK KETCH, chief Executioner of England. A HERALD. A BAILIFF. EDMUND PALLING, an old man. TRADERS. APTHORP'S MINIONS. APTHORP'S HANGERS-ON AND FAVOR-SEEKERS. JACK KETCH'S ASSISTANTS. SOLDIERS. MUSICIANS. Scene: A court hemmed in by colonnades. Discover DANIEL WATERHOUSE, seated on a Chair amid scuffling and shouting TRADERS. Enter SIR RICHARD APTHORP, with Minions, Hangers-on, and Favor-seekers. APTHORP: It couldn't be – Dr. Daniel Waterhouse! WATERHOUSE: Well met, Sir Richard! APTHORP: Sitting in a chair, no less! WATERHOUSE: The day is long, Sir Richard, my legs are tired. APTHORP: It helps if you keep moving – which is the whole point of the ‘Change, by the by. This is the Temple of Mercury – not of Saturn! WATERHOUSE: Did you think I was being Saturnine? Saturn is Cronos, the God of Time. For your truly Saturnine character you had better look to Mr. Hooke, world's foremost clockmaker . . . Enter Dutchman. DUTCHMAN: Sir! Our Mr. Huygens taught your Mr. Hooke everything he knows! Exits. WATERHOUSE: Different countries revere the same gods under different names. The Greeks had Cronos, the Romans Saturn. The Dutch have Huygens and we have Hooke. APTHORP: If you are not Saturn, what are you, then, to bide in a chair, so gloomy and pensive, in the middle of the ‘Change? WATERHOUSE: I am he who was born to be his family's designated participant in the Apocalypse; who was named after the strangest book in the Bible; who rode Pestilence out of London and Fire into it. I escorted Drake Waterhouse and King Charles from this world, and I put Cromwell's head back into its grave with these two hands. APTHORP: My word! Sir! WATERHOUSE: Of late I have been observed lurking round Whitehall, dressed in black, affrighting the courtiers. APTHORP: What brings Lord Pluto to the Temple of Mercury? Enter Jew. JEW: By're leave, by're leave, Señor – pray – where stands the tablero? Wanders off. APTHORP: He sees that you have a Chair, and hopes you know where is the Table. WATERHOUSE: That would be mesa. Perhaps he means banca, desk . . . APTHORP: Every other man in this ‘Change, who is seated upon a chair, is in front of such a banca. He wants to know where yours has got to! WATERHOUSE: I meant that perhaps he is looking for the bank. APTHORP: You mean, me? WATERHOUSE: That is the new title you have given your goldsmith's shop now, is it not? A bank? APTHORP: Why, yes; but why doesn't he just ask for me then? WATERHOUSE: Señor! A moment, I beg you! Jew returns with a paper. JEW: Like this, like this! APTHORP: What is he holding up there, I do not have my spectacles. WATERHOUSE: He has drawn what a Natural Philosopher would identify as a Cartesian coordinate plane, and what you would style a ledger, and scrawled words in one column, and numerals in the next. APTHORP: Tablero – he means the board where the prices of something are billed. Commodities, most likely. JEW: Commodities, yes! WATERHOUSE: ‘Sblood, it's right over there in the corner, is the man blind? APTHORP: Rabbi, do not take offense at my friend's irritable tone, for he is the Lord of the Underworld, and known for his moods. Here in Mercury's temple all is movement, flux – which is why we name it the ‘Change. Knowledge and intelligence flow like the running waters spoken of in the Psalms. But you have made the mistake of asking Pluto, the God of Secrets. Why is Pluto here? 'Tis something of a mystery – I myself was startled to see him just now, and supposed I was looking at a ghost. WATERHOUSE: The tablero is over yonder. JEW: That is all!? APTHORP: You have come from Amsterdam? JEW: Yes. APTHORP: How many commodities are billed on the tablero in Amsterdam now? JEW: This number . . . Writes. APTHORP: Daniel, what has he written there? WATERHOUSE: Five hundred and fifty. APTHORP: God save England, the Dutchmen have a tablero with near six hundred commodities, and we've a plank with a few dozen. WATERHOUSE: No wonder he did not recognize it. Exit Jew in the direction of said Plank, rolling his eyes and scoffing. Apthorp (to Minion): Follow that Kohan and learn what he is on about – he knows something. Exit Minion. WATERHOUSE: Now who is the God of Secrets? APTHORP: You are, for you still have not told me why you are here. WATERHOUSE: As Lord of the Underworld, I customarily sit enthroned in the Well of Souls, where departed spirits whirl about me like so many dry leaves. Arising this morning at my lodgings in Gresham's College and strolling down Bishopsgate, I chanced to look in ‘tween the columns of the ‘Change here. It was deserted. But a wind-vortex was picking up all the little scraps of paper dropped by traders yesterday and making 'em orbit round past all of the bancas like so many dry leaves . . . I became confused, thinking I had reached Hell, and took my accustomed seat. APTHORP: Your discourse is annoying. Enter Marquis of Ravenscar, magnificently attired. RAVENSCAR: “The hypothesis of vortices is pressed with many difficulties!' WATERHOUSE: God save the King, m'lord. APTHORP: God save the King – and damn all riddlers – m'lord. WATERHOUSE: ‘Twere redundant to damn Pluto. RAVENSCAR: He's damning me, Daniel, for prating about vortices. APTHORP: The mystery is resolved. For now I perceive that the two of you have arranged to meet here. And since you are speaking of vortices, m'lord, I ween it has to do with Natural Philosophy. RAVENSCAR: I beg leave to disagree, Sir Richard. For 'twas this fellow in the chair who chose the place of our meeting. Normally we meet in the Golden Grasshopper. APTHORP: So the mystery endures. Why the ‘Change today, then, Daniel? WATERHOUSE: You will see soon enough. RAVENSCAR: Perhaps it is because we are going to exchange some documents. Voilà! APTHORP: What is that you have whipped out of your pocket m'lord, I do not have my spectacles. RAVENSCAR: The latest from Hanover. Dr. Leibniz has favored you, Daniel, with a personalized and autographed copy of the latest Acta Eruditorum. Lots of mathematickal incantations are in here, chopped up with great stretched-out S marks – extraordinary! WATERHOUSE: Then the Doctor has finally dropped the other shoe, for that could only be the Integral Calculus. RAVENSCAR: Too, some letters addressed to you personally, Daniel, which means they've only been read by a few dozen people so far. WATERHOUSE: By your leave. APTHORP: Good heavens, m'lord, if Mr. Waterhouse had snatched 'em any quicker they'd've caught fire. One who dwells in the Underworld ought to be more cautious when handling Inflammable Objects. WATERHOUSE: Here, m'lord, fresh from Cambridge, as promised, I give you Books I and II of Principia Mathematica by Isaac Newton – have a care, some would consider it a valuable document. APTHORP: My word, is that the cornerstone of a building, or a manuscript? RAVENSCAR: Err! To judge by weight, it is the former. APTHORP: Whatever it is, it is too long, too long! WATERHOUSE: It explains the System of the World. APTHORP: Some sharp editor needs to step in and take that wretch in hand! RAVENSCAR: Will you just look at all of these damned illustrations . . . do you realize what this will cost, for all of the woodcuts? WATERHOUSE: Think of each one of them as saving a thousand pages of tedious explanations full of great stretched-out S marks. RAVENSCAR: None the less, the cost of printing this is going to bankrupt the Royal Society! APTHORP: So that is why Mr. Waterhouse is seated at a chair, with no banca:it is a symbolic posture, meant to express the financial condition of the Royal Society. I very much fear that I am to be asked for money at this point. Say, can either one of you hear a word I am saying? Silence. APTHORP: Go ahead and read. I don't mind being ignored. Are those documents terribly fascinating, then? Silence. APTHORP: Ah, like a salmon weaving a devious course up-torrent, slipping round boulders and leaping o'er logs, my assistant is making his way back to me. Enter Minion. MINION: You were right concerning the Jew, Sir Richard. He wants to purchase certain commodities in large amounts. APTHORP: At this moment on a Board in Amsterdam, those commodities must be fetching a higher price than is scribbled on our humble English Plank. The Jew wants to buy low here, and sell high there. Pray tell, what sorts of commodities are in such high demand in Amsterdam? MINION: He takes a particular interest in certain coarse, durable fabrics . . . APTHORP: Sailcloth! Someone is building a navy! MINION: He specifically does not want sailcloth, but cheaper stuff. APTHORP: Tent cloth! Someone is building an army! Come, let us go and buy all the war-stuff we can find. Exit Apthorp and entourage. RAVENSCAR: So this is the thing Newton's been working on? WATERHOUSE: How could he have produced that without working on it? RAVENSCAR: When I work on things, Daniel, they come out in disjoint parts, a lump at a time; this is a unitary whole, like the garment of Our Saviour, seamless . . . what is he going to do in Book III? Raise the dead and ascend into Heaven? WATERHOUSE: He is going to solve the orbit of the moon, provided Flamsteed will part with the requisite data. RAVENSCAR: If Flamsteed doesn't, I'll see to it he parts with his fingernails. God! Here's a catchy bit: 'To every action there is an equal and opposite reaction . . . if you press a stone with your finger, the finger is also pressed by the stone.' The perfection of this work is obvious even to me, Daniel! How must it look to you? WATERHOUSE: If you are going down that road, then ask rather how it looks to Leibniz, for he is as far beyond me as I am beyond you; if Newton is the finger, Leibniz is the stone, and they press against each other with equal and opposite force, a little bit harder every day. RAVENSCAR: But Leibniz has not read it, and you have, so there would be little point in asking him. WATERHOUSE: I have taken the liberty of conveying the essentials to Leibniz, which explains why he is writing so many of these damned letters. RAVENSCAR: But certainly Leibniz would not dare to challenge a work of such radiance! WATERHOUSE: Leibniz is at the disadvantage of not having seen it. Or perhaps we should count this as an advantage, for anyone who sees it is dumbfounded by the brilliance of the geometry, and it is difficult to criticize a man's work when you are down on your knees shielding your eyes. RAVENSCAR: You believe that Leibniz has discovered an error in one of these proofs? WATERHOUSE: No, proofs such as Newton's cannot have errors. RAVENSCAR: Cannot? WATERHOUSE: As a man looks at an apple on a table and says, 'There is an apple on the table,' you may look at these geometrical diagrams of Newton's and say, 'Newton speaks the truth.' RAVENSCAR: Then I'll convey a copy to the Doctor forthwith, so that he may join us on his knees. WATERHOUSE: Don't bother. Leibniz's objection lies not in what Newton has done but in what he has not done. RAVENSCAR: Perhaps we can get Newton to do it in Book III, then, and remove the objection! You have influence with him . . . WATERHOUSE: The ability to annoy Isaac is not to be confused with influence. RAVENSCAR: We will convey Leibniz's objections to him directly, then. WATERHOUSE: You do not grasp the nature of Leibniz's objections. It is not that Newton left some corollary unproved, or failed to follow up on some promising line of inquiry. Turn back, even before the Laws of Motion, and read what Isaac says in his introduction. I can quote it from memory: 'For I here design only to give a mathematical notion of these forces, without considering their physical causes and seats.' RAVENSCAR: What is wrong with that? WATERHOUSE: Some would argue that as Natural Philosophers we are supposed to consider their physical causes and seats! This morning, Roger, I sat in this empty courtyard, in the midst of a whirlwind. The whirlwind was invisible; how did I know 'twas here? Because of the motion it conferred on innumerable scraps of paper, which orbited round me. Had I thought to bring along my instruments I could have taken observations and measured the velocities and plotted the trajectories of those scraps, and if I were as brilliant as Isaac I could have drawn all of those data together into a single unifying picture of the whirlwind. But if I were Leibniz I'd have done none of those things. Instead I'd have asked, Why is the whirlwind here? ENTR'ACTE Noises off: A grave Procession ascending Fish Street Hill, coming from the TOWER OF LONDON. Traders exhibit startlement and dismay as the Procession marches into the Exchange, disrupting Commerce. Enter first two platoons of the King's Own Black Torrent Guards, armed with muskets, affixed to the muzzles whereof are long stabbing-weapons in the style recently adopted by the French Army, and nominated by thembayonets. Leveling these, the soldiers clear all traders from the center of the ‘Change, and compel them to form up in concentric ranks, like spectators gathered round an impromptu Punchinello-show at a fair. Enter now trumpeters and drummers, followed by a HERALD bellowing legal gibberish. As drummers beat a slow and dolorous cadence, enter JACK KETCH in a black hood. The assembled traders are silent as the dead. Jack Ketch walks slowly into the center of the empty space and stands with arms folded. Enter now a wagon drawn by a black horse and loaded with faggots and jars, flanked by the ASSISTANTS of Jack Ketch. Assistants pile the wood on the ground and then soak it with oil poured from the jars. Enter now BAILIFF carrying a BOOK bound up in chains and padlocks. JACK KETCH: In the name of the King, stop and identify yourself! BAILIFF: John Bull, a bailiff. JACK KETCH: State your business. BAILIFF: It is the King's business. I have here a prisoner to be bound over for execution. JACK KETCH: What is the prisoner's name? BAILIFF: A History of the Late Massacres and Persecutions of the French Huguenots; to which is appended a brief relation of the bloody and atrocious crimes recently visited upon blameless Protestants dwelling in the realms of the Duke of Savoy, at the behest of King Louis XIV of France. JACK KETCH: Has this prisoner been accused of a crime? BAILIFF: Not only accused, but justly convicted, of spreading contumacious falsehoods, attempting to arouse civil discord, and leveling many base slanders against the good name of The Most Christian King Louis XIV, a true friend of our own King and a loyal ally of England. JACK KETCH: Vile crimes, indeed! Has a sentence been pronounced? BAILIFF: Indeed, as I mentioned before, it has been ordered by Lord Jeffreys that the prisoner is to be bound over to you for immediate execution. JACK KETCH: Then I'll welcome him as I did the late Duke of Monmouth. Jack Ketch advances toward the Bailiff and grips the end of the chain. The bailiff drops the Book and dusts off his hands. To a slow cadence of muffled drums, Jack Ketch marches to the wood-pile, dragging the book across the pavement behind him. He heaves the book onto the top of the pile, steps back, and accepts a torch from an assistant. JACK KETCH: Any last words, villainous Book? No? Very well, then to hell with thee! Lights the fire. Traders, Soldiers, Musicians, Executioner's Staff, &c. watch silently as the Book is consumed by the flames. Exeunt Bailiff, Herald, Executioners, Musicians, and Soldiers, leaving behind a smouldering heap of coals. Traders resume commerce as if nothing had happened, save for EDMUND PALLING, an old man. PALLING: Mr. Waterhouse! From the fact that you are the only one who brought something to sit on, may I assume you knew that this shameful poppet-show would disgrace the ‘Change today? WATERHOUSE: That would appear to be the unspoken message. PALLING: Unspokenis an interesting word . . . what of the truths that were spoken in the late Book, concerning the persecutions of our brethren in France and Savoy? Have they now been unspoken because the pages were burnt? WATERHOUSE: I have heard many a sermon in my life, Mr. Palling, and I know where this one is bound . . . you're going to say that just as the immortal spirit departs the body to be one with God, so the contents of the late Book are now going to wherever its smoke is distributed by the four winds . . . say, weren't you Massachusetts-bound? PALLING: I am only bating until I have raised money for the passage, and would probably be finished by now if Jack Ketch had not muddied and stirred the subtle currents of the market. Exits. Enter Sir Richard Apthorp. APTHORP: Burning books . . . is that not a favorite practice of the Spanish Inquisition? WATERHOUSE: I have never been to Spain, Sir Richard, and so the only way I know that they burn books is because of the vast number of books that have been published on the subject. APTHORP: Hmmm, yes . . . I take your meaning. WATERHOUSE: I beg of you, do not say ‘I take your meaning' with such ponderous significance . . . I do not wish to be Jack Ketch's next guest. You have asked, sir, over and over, why I am sitting here in a chair. Now you know the answer: I came to see justice done. APTHORP: But you knew ‘twould happen – you had aught to do with it. Why did you set it in the ‘Change? At Tyburn tree, during one of the regularly scheduled Friday hangings, ‘twould've drawn a much more appreciative crowd – why, you could burn a whole library there and the Mobb would be stomping their feet for an encore. WATERHOUSE: They don't read books. The point would've been lost on 'em. APTHORP: If the point is to put the fear of God into literate men, why not burn it at Cambridge and Oxford? WATERHOUSE: Jack Ketch hates to travel. The new carriages have so little leg-room, and his great Axe does not fit into the luggage bins . . . APTHORP: Could it be because College men do not have the money and power to organize a rebellion? WATERHOUSE: Why, yes, that's it. No point intimidating the weak. Threaten the dangerous. APTHORP: To what end? To keep them in line? Or to put thoughts of rebellion into their minds? WATERHOUSE: Your question, sir, amounts to asking whether I am a turncoat against the cause of my forebears – corrupted by the fœtid atmosphere of Whitehall – or a traitorous organizer of a secret rebellion. APTHORP: Why, yes, I suppose it does. WATERHOUSE: Then would you please ask easier questions or else go away and leave me alone? For whether I'm a back-stabber or a Phanatique, I am in either case no longer a scholar to be trifled with. If you must ply someone with such questions, ask them of yourself; if you insist on an answer, unburden your secrets to me before you ask me to trust you with mine. Assuming I have any. APTHORP: I think that you do, sir. Bows. WATERHOUSE: Why do you doff your hat to me thus? APTHORP: To honor you, sir, and to pay my respects to him who made you. WATERHOUSE: What, Drake? APTHORP: Why, no, I refer to your Mentor, the late John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester – or as some would say, the living incarnation of Janus. For that good fellow penned the Cryptonomicon with one hand and the Universal Character with the other; he was a good friend of high and mighty Cavaliers at the same time he was wooing and marrying Cromwell's own sister; and, in sum, was Janus-like in diverse ways I'll not bother enumerating to you. For you are truly his pupil, his creation: one moment dispensing intelligence like a Mercury, the next keeping counsel like Pluto. WATERHOUSE: Mentor was a guise adopted by Minerva, and her pupil was great Ulysses, and so by hewing to a strict Classical interpretation of your words, sir, I'll endeavour not to take offense. APTHORP: Endeavour and succeed, my good man, for no offense was meant. Good day. Exits. Enter Ravenscar, carryingPrincipia Mathematica. RAVENSCAR: I'm taking this to the printer's straightaway, but before I do, I was pondering this Newton/Leibniz thing . . . WATERHOUSE: What!? Jack Ketch's performance made no impression on you at all? RAVENSCAR: Oh, that? I assume you arranged it that way in order to buttress your position as the King's token Puritan bootlick – whilst in fact stirring rebellious spirits in the hearts and minds of the rich and powerful. Forgive me for not tossing out a compliment. Twenty years ago I'd have admired it, but by my current standards it is only a modestly sophisticated ploy. The matter of Newton and Leibniz is much more interesting. WATERHOUSE: Go ahead, then. RAVENSCAR: Descartes explained, years and years ago, that the planets move round the sun like slips of paper caught up in a wind-vortex. So Leibniz's objection is groundless – there is no mystery, and therefore Newton did not gloss over any problems. WATERHOUSE: Leibniz has been trying to make sense of Descartes' dynamics for years, and finally given up. Descartes was wrong. His theory of dynamics is beautiful in that it is purely geometrical and mathematical. But when you compare that theory to the world as it really is, it proves an unmitigated disaster. The whole notion of vortices does not work. There is no doubt that the inverse square law exists, and governs the motions of all heavenly bodies along conic sections. But it has nothing to do with vortices, or the cœlestial æther, or any of that other nonsense. RAVENSCAR: What brings it about, then? WATERHOUSE: Isaac says it is God, or God's presence in the physical world. Leibniz says it has to be some sort of interaction among particles too tiny to see . . . RAVENSCAR: Atoms? WATERHOUSE: Atoms – to make a long story short and leave out all the good bits – could not move and change fast enough. Instead Leibniz speaks of monads, which are more fundamental than atoms. If I try to explain we'll both get headaches. Suffice it to say, he is going at it hammer and tongs, and we will hear more from him in due course. RAVENSCAR: That is very odd, for he avers in a personal letter to me that, having published the Integral Calculus, he'll now turn his attention to genealogical research. WATERHOUSE: That sort of work entails much travel, and the Doctor does his best work when he's rattling round the Continent in his carriage. He can do both things, and more, at the same time. RAVENSCAR: In the decision to study history, some will see an admission of defeat to Newton. I myself cannot understand why he should want to waste his time digging up ancient family trees. WATERHOUSE: Perhaps I'm not the only Natural Philosopher who can put together a 'moderately sophisticated ploy' when he needs to. RAVENSCAR: What on earth are you talking about? WATERHOUSE: Dig up some ancient family trees, stop assuming that Leibniz is a defeated ninehammer, and consider it. Put your philosophick acumen to use: know, for example, that the children of syphilitics are often syphilitic themselves, and unable to bear viable offspring. RAVENSCAR: Now you are swimming out into the deep water, Daniel. Monsters are there – bear it in mind. WATERHOUSE: 'Tis true, and when a man has got to a point in his life when he needs to slay a monster, like St. George, or be eaten by one, like Jonah, I think that is where he goes a-swimming. RAVENSCAR: Is it your intention to slay, or be eaten? WATERHOUSE: I have already been eaten. My choices are to slay, or else be vomited up on some bit of dry land somewhere – Massachusetts, perhaps. RAVENSCAR: Right. Well, before you make me any more alarmed, I'm off to the printer's. WATERHOUSE: It may be the finest errand you ever do, Roger. Exit Marquis of Ravenscar. Enter Sir Richard Apthorp solus. APTHORP: Woe. Bad tidings and alarums! Fear for England . . . O miserable island! WATERHOUSE: What can possibly have happened, in the Temple of Mercury, to alter your mood so? Did you lose a lot of money? APTHORP: No, I made a lot, buying low and selling high. WATERHOUSE: Buying what? APTHORP: Tent-cloth, saltpeter, lead, and other martial commodities. WATERHOUSE: From whom? APTHORP: Men who knew less than I did. WATERHOUSE: And you sold it to – ? APTHORP: Men who knew more. WATERHOUSE: A typical commercial transaction, all in all. APTHORP: Except that I acquired knowledge as part of the bargain. And the knowledge fills me with dread. WATERHOUSE: Share it with Pluto, then, for he knows all secrets, and keeps most of 'em, and basks in Dread as an old dog lies in the sun. APTHORP: The buyer is the King of England. WATERHOUSE: Good news, then! Our King is bolstering our defences. APTHORP: But why d'you suppose the Jew braved the North Sea to come and buy it here? WATERHOUSE: Because 'Tis cheaper here? APTHORP: It isn't. But he saves money to buy it in England, because then there are no expenses for shipping. For these warlike commodities are supposed to be delivered, not to some foreign battle-ground, but here:to England – which is where the King intends to use 'em. WATERHOUSE: That is extraordinary, since there are no foreigners here to practise war upon. APTHORP: Only Englishmen, as far as the eye can see! WATERHOUSE: Perhaps the King fears a foreign invasion. APTHORP: Does it give you comfort to think so? WATERHOUSE: To think of being invaded? No. To think of the Coldstream Guards, the Grenadiers, and the King's Own Black Torrent Guards fighting foreigners, ‘stead of Englishmen, why yes. APTHORP: Then it follows, does it not, that all good Englishmen should bend their efforts to bringing it about. WATERHOUSE: Let us now choose our words carefully, for Jack Ketch is only just round the corner. APTHORP: No man has been choosing his words more carefully than you, Daniel. WATERHOUSE: Lest native arms fraternal blood might shed, For want of alien foes and righteous broil, We'd fain see foreign canvas off our shores, And English towns beset by armèd Boers. Our soldiers, if they love by whom they're led, May then let foreign blood on English soil. And if they don't, and let their colors fall, Their leader never was their King at all. Versailles 1687 To d'Avaux, March1687 Monseigneur, Finally, a real spring day – my fingers have thawed out and I am able to write again. I would like to be out enjoying the flowers, but instead I am despatching letters to tulip-land. You will be pleased to know that as of last week there are no beggars in France. The King has declared beggary illegal. The nobles who live at Versailles are of two minds concerning this. Of course they all agree that it is magnificent. But many of them are scarcely above beggars themselves, and so they are wondering whether the law applies to them. Fortunately – for those who have daughters, anyway – Mme. de Maintenon has got her girls' school open at St.-Cyr, just a few minutes' ride from the château of Versailles. This has complicated my situation a little. The girl I have supposedly been tutoring – the daughter of the Marquise d'Ozoir – has begun attending the school, which makes my position redundant. So far, there has been no talk of letting me go. I have been putting my free time to good use, making two trips to Lyons to learn about how commerce works in that place. But apparently Édouard de Gex has been spreading tales of my great skills as a tutor to the Maintenon, who has begun making noises about bringing me to St.-Cyr as a teacher. Did I mention that the teachers are all nuns? De Maintenon and de Gex are so shrouded in outward Godliness that I cannot make out their motives. It is almost conceivable that they believe, sincerely, that I am a good candidate for the convent – in other words, that they are too detached from worldly matters to understand my true function here. Or perhaps they know full well that I am managing assets for twenty-one different French nobles, and they wish to neutralize me – or bring me under their control by threatening to do so. To business: returns for the first quarter of 1687 have been satisfactory, as you know since you are a client. I pooled all of the money into a fund and invested it mostly through sub-brokers in Amsterdam, who specialize in particular commodities or species of V.O.C. derivatives. We are still making money on India cloth, thanks to King Louis who made it contraband and thereby drove up the price. But V.O.C. shares fell after William of Orange declared the League of Augsburg. William may be full of bluster about how the Protestant alliance is going to rein in the power of France, but his own stock market seems to take an extremely dim view of the project! As does the court here – tout le mondefinds it tremendously amusing that William, and Sophie of Hanover, and a grab-bag of other frostbitten Lutherans believe they can stand up to La France. There is brave talk about how Father de Gex and Maréchal de Catinat, who suppressed the Protestants in Savoy with such force, ought now to ride North and and give the same treatment to the Dutch and the Germans. For now it is my rôle to set aside any personal feelings I may have concerning politics, and to think only of how this might affect markets. My footing here is soft – I am like a mare galloping down a mucky beach, afraid to falter, out of fear that she may be treading on quicksand. With markets in Amsterdam fluctuating hourly, I cannot really manage assets from Versailles – the day-to-day buying and selling is carried out by my associates in the north. But French nobles will not be seen doing business with Dutch hereticks and Spanish Jews. So I am a sort of figurehead, like the pretty mermaid on the bow of a ship that is laden with other people's treasure and manned by swarthy corsairs. The only thing to be said in favor of being a figurehead is that the position gives one an excellent view ahead, and plenty of time to think. Help me, Monseigneur, to have as clear a view as possible of the seas we are about to plow up. I cannot help but think that in a year or two I shall be forced to gamble all of my clients' assets on the outcome of great events. Investing round the time of Monmouth's rebellion was not difficult because I knew Monmouth, and knew how it would come out. But I know William, too – not as well – but well enough to know I cannot gamble against him with certainty. Monmouth was a hobbyhorse and William is a stallion. Experience gained riding the first can only misinform me as to what it shall be like to ride the second. So inform me, Monseigneur. Tell me things. You know your intelligence will be safe in transit, because of the excellence of this cypher, and you know it will be safe with me, for I have no friends here to whisper it to. Only small minds want always to be right. – LOUIS XIV To d'Avaux, June1687 Monseigneur, When I complained that Fr. de Gex and Mme. de Maintenon were trying to make me over into a nun, I never imagined you would respond by making me out to be a whore! Mme. la duchesse d'Oyonnax has practically had to post Swiss guards at the entrance of her apartments to keep the young blades away from me. What sorts of rumors have you been spreading? That I am a nymphomaniac? That a thousand louis d'or will go to the first Frenchman who beds me? At any rate, now I have some idea as to who belongs to the cabinet noir. One day, all of a sudden, Fr. de Gex was very cool to me, and Étienne d'Arcachon, the one-armed son of the Duke, called on me to say that he did not believe any of the rumors that were being spread about me. I think I was meant to be bowled over by his nobility – with him, it is difficult to tell. For on the one hand he is so excessively polite that some affirm he is not in his right mind, and on the other (though he has no other!) he saw me at the opera with Monmouth and knows some of my history. Otherwise why would a Duke's son even give the time of day to a common servant? The only circumstance under which a man of his rank and a woman of mine could ever be seen conversing with each other is a fancy-dress ball, when ranks are of no account and all the normal rules of precedence are suspended for a few hours. The other evening, Étienne d'Arcachon escorted me to one at Dampierre, the château of the duc de Chevreuse. He dressed as Pan and I as a Nymph. Here any proper Court lady would devote several pages to describing the costumes, and the intrigues and machinations that went into their making, but since I am not a proper Court lady and you are a busy man, I will leave it at that – pausing only to mention that Étienne had a special prosthetic hand carved out of boxwood and strapped to his stump. The hand was gripping a silver Pan-pipe all twined about with ivy (emerald leaves, of course, and ruby berries) and from time to time he would raise this to his lips and pipe a little melody that he had Lully compose for him. As we rode in the carriage to Dampierre, Étienne mentioned to me, 'You know, our host the duc de Chevreuse is the son-in-law of a commoner: Colbert, the late Contrôleur-Général, who built Versailles among other accomplishments.' As you know, this is not the first such veiled remark that has been directed my way by a Frenchman of high rank. The first time it happened I became ever so excited, thinking I was about to be ennobled at any minute. Then for a time I affected a cynical view, supposing that this was like a snatch of meat dangled high above a dog's nose to make it do tricks. But on this evening, riding to the splendid château of Dampierre on the arm of a future Duke, the burden of my low rank lifted for a few hours by a mask and costume, I phant'sied that Étienne's remark really meant something, and that if I could use my skills to achieve some great accomplishment, I might be rewarded as Colbert had been. Pretend now that I have dutifully described all of the costumes, the table-settings, the food, and the entertainments that the duc de Chevreuse had brought together at Dampierre. This will spare enough pages to make a small book. At first the mood was somewhat gloomy, for Mansart – the King's architect – was there, and he had just received news that the Parthenon in Athens has been blown up. Apparently the Turks had been using it as a powder-magazine and the Venetians, who are trying to bring that city back into Christendom, bombarded it with mortars and touched off a great explosion. Mansart – who had always harbored an ambition of making a pilgrimage to Athens to see that building with his own eyes – was inconsolable. There was some blustery talk from Étienne to the effect that he would personally lead a squadron of his father's Mediterranean fleet to Athens to take that city back into Christendom. This was a faux pas of sorts because Athens is not actually located on the water. Therefore it led to a few moments' awkward silence. I decided to strike. No one knew who I was, and even if they found out, my status and my reputation (thanks to you!) could scarcely sink lower. 'So gloomy are we because of this news from abroad,' I exclaimed, 'and yet what is news but words, and what are words but air?' Now this produced only a few titters because everyone was assuming that I was just another empty-headed Duchess who had read too much Pascal. But I had their attention (if you could see my gown, Monseigneur, you would know I had their attention; my face was hidden, everything else was getting a good airing-out). I continued, 'Why should we not conjure up some news more to our liking, and throw our enemies the Dutchmen into a gloomy mood, so that we may be infused with gaiety and joy?' Now most of them were nonplussed, but several took an interest – including one chap who was dressed up as Orion after he had been blinded by Oenopion, so that his mask had blood running out of the eye-sockets. Orion asked me to say more, and so I did: 'Here, we are susceptible to emotion, because we are people of great feeling and passion, and accordingly we are saddened by the destruction of the Parthenon, for we value beauty. In Amsterdam, they have investments instead of emotions, and all they value is their precious V.O.C. stock. We could destroy all the treasures of the Classical world and they would not care; but if they hear bad news that touches the V.O.C., they are plunged into despair – or rather the price of the stock falls, which amounts to the same thing.' 'Since you appear to know so much about it, tell us what would be the worst news they could hear,' said blind Orion. 'Why, the fall of Batavia – for that is the linch-pin of their overseas empire.' By now Orion had come face-to-face with me and we were in the middle of a ring of costumed nobles who were all leaning forward to listen. For it was obvious to everyone that the man dressed as Orion was none other than the King himself. He said, 'The doings of the cheese-mongers are a vulgar muddle to us – trying to understand them is like watching muddy English peasants at one of their shin-kicking contests. If it is so easy to bring about a crash in the Amsterdam market, why doesn't it crash all the time? For anyone could spread such a rumor.' 'And many do – it is very common for a few investors to get together and form a cabal, which is a sort of secret society that manipulates the market for profit. The machinations of these cabals have grown exceedingly complex, with as many moves and variations as dance steps. But at some point they all rely upon spreading false news into the ears of credulous investors. Now these cabals form and join, split and vanish like clouds in the summer sky, and so the market has become resistant to news, especially bad news; for most investors now assume that any bad news from abroad is false information put out by a cabal.' 'Then what hope have we of convincing these skeptical hereticks that Batavia has fallen?' asked Orion. 'My answering your question is complicated somewhat by the fact that everyone here is wearing a disguise,' I said, 'but it would not be unreasonable to suppose that the Grand Admiral of the French Navy (the duc d'Arcachon) and the Contrôleur of the French East India Company (the Marquis d'Ozoir) are present, and able to hear my words. For men of such eminence, it would be no great thing to make it believed and understood, from the top to the bottom of the French naval and merchant fleets, and in every port from Spain to Flanders, that a French expeditionary force had rounded the Cape of Good Hope and fallen suddenly upon Batavia and seized it from the V.O.C. The news would spread north up the coast like fire along a powder-trail, and when it reached the Damplatz – ' 'The Damplatz is the powder-keg,' Orion concluded. 'This plan has beauty, for it would require little risk or expenditure from us, yet would cause more damage to William of Orange than an invasion by fifty thousand of our dragoons.' 'While at the same time bringing profit to anyone who knew in advance, and who took the right positions in the market,' I added. Now, Monseigneur, I know for a fact that on the next morning Louis XIV went on a trip to his lodge at Marly, and invited the Marquis d'Ozoir and the duc d'Arcachon to join him. Speaking for myself, I have spent all the time since talking to French nobles who are desperate to know what 'the right position' is. I have lost track of the number of times I have had to explain the concept of selling short, and that when V.O.C. stock falls it tends to bring about a rise in commodity prices as capital flies from one to the other. Above all, I've had to make it clear that if a lot of Frenchmen, new to the markets, suddenly sell the V.O.C. short while investing in commodities futures, it will make it obvious to the Dutch that a cabal has formed at the court of the Sun King. That (in other words) the ground-work must be laid with great care and subtlety – which amounts to saying that I must do it. In any event, a lot of French gold is going to be making its way north in the next week. I will send details in another letter. The diligent Dutch seeing the Easiness of the managing and curing the Berry, and how that Part had no Dependence, either upon the Earth, the Air, the Water, or anything else more there, than in another Place, took the Hint, and planted the Coffee Tree in the Island of Java, near their City of Batavia, there it thrives, bears, and ripens every jot as well as at Mocha; and now they begin to leave off the Red Sea, and bring 20 to 30 Tons of Coffee, at a time, from Batavia, in the Latitude of 5 Deg. S. – DANIEL DEFOE, A Plan of the English Commerce To Leibniz, August1687 Doctor, Increase is the order of the day here;*the gardens, orchards, and vineyards are buried in their own produce and the country roads crowded with wagons bringing it to market. France is at peace, her soldiers at home, mending and building and getting maidens pregnant out of wedlock so that there will be a next generation of soldiers. New construction is going on all over Versailles, and many here have become modestly wealthy or at least paid off part of their gambling debts in the wake of the stock market crash in Amsterdam. I am sorry not to have written in so many weeks. This cypher is extremely time-consuming and I have been too busy with all of the machinations surrounding the 'fall of Batavia.' Mme. la duchesse d'Oyonnax threw a garden party the other evening; the highlight was a re-enactment of the Fall of Batavia – which, as everyone knows by now, never really happened – played out on the Canal. A fleet of French 'frigates,' no bigger than rowboats, and trimmed and decorated phantastically, like dream-ships, besieged a model 'Batavia' built on the brink of the canal. The Dutchmen in the town were drinking beer and counting gold until they fell asleep. Then the dream-fleet made its attack. The Dutchmen were alarmed at first, until they woke up and understood it had all been a dream . . . but when they returned to their counting-tables, they found that their gold was really gone! The vanishing of the gold was accomplished through some sleight-of-hand so that everyone in the party was completely surprised. Then the dream-fleet cruised up and down the canal for the better part of an hour, and everyone crowded along the banks to admire it. Each vessel represented some virtue that is representative of la France, e.g., Fertility, Martial Prowess, Piety, et cetera, et cetera, and the captain of each one was a Duke or Prince, dressed up in costumes to match. As they drifted up and down the Canal they threw the captured coins in showers of gold into the ranks of the party-goers. The Dauphin wore a golden frock embroidered with . . . I have seen this man Upnor now. He enjoys a high rank in the court of James II and has many friends in France, for he was a boy here during the time of Cromwell. Everyone wants to hear about his Protestant slave-girl and he is not slow to talk about her. He is too well-bred to gloat openly, but it is obvious that he takes great pleasure in owning her. Here, the enslavement of rebels in England is likened to the French practice of sending Huguenots to the galleys, and rated as more humane than simply killing them all as was done in Savoy. I had not been sure whether to credit Bob Shaftoe's tale and so I was quite startled to see Upnor in the flesh, and to hear him talking about this. It seems shameful to me – a scandal that the guilty would wish to hide from the world. But to them it is nothing. While sympathizing with poor Abigail Frome, I rejoice that this has come to pass. If the slavers had shown more discretion and continued to take their victims only from black Africa, no one would notice or care – why, I am as guilty as the next person of putting sugar in my coffee without considering the faraway Negroes who made it for me. For James and his ilk to take slaves from Ireland entails more risk, even when they are criminals. But to take English girls from farm-towns is repugnant to almost everyone (the population of Versailles excepted) and an invitation to rebellion. After listening to Upnor I am more certain than ever that England will soon rise up in arms – and James apparently agrees with me, for word has it that he's built great military camps on the edge of London and lavished money on his prize regiments. I fear only that in the chaos and excitement of rebellion, the people of that country will forget about the Taunton schoolgirls and what they signify about slavery in general . . . the tiller and rudder of which were all overgrown with living grape-vines. Forgive me this endless description of the various Dukes and their dream-boats, I look back over the preceding several pages and see I quite forgot myself. To Leibniz, October1687 Doctor, Family, family, family*is all anyone wants to talk about. Who is talking to me, you might ask, given that I am a commoner? The answer is that in certain recesses of this immense château there are large salons that are given over entirely to gambling, which is the only thing these nobles can do to make their lives interesting. In these places the usual etiquette is suspended and everyone talks to everyone. Of course the trick is gaining admission to such a salon in the first place – but after my success with the 'Fall of Batavia' some of these doors were opened to me (back doors, anyway – I must come in through the servants' entrances) and so it is not unusual for me now to exchange words with a Duchess or even a Princess. But I don't go to these places as often as you might think, for when you are there you have no choice but to gamble, and I don't enjoy it I loathe it and the people who do it is more accurate. But some of the men who will read this letter are heavy gamblers and so I will be demure . More and more frequently people ask me about my family. Someone has been spreading rumors that I have noble blood in my veins! I hope that during your genealogical research you can turn up some supporting evidence . . . turning me into a Countess should be easy compared to making Sophie an Electress. Enough people here now depend on me that my status as a commoner is awkward and inconvenient. They need a pretext to give me a title so that they can have routine conversations with me without having to set up elaborate shams, such as fancy-dress balls, to circumvent the etiquette. Just the other day I was playing basset with M. le duc de Berwick, who is the bastard of James II by Arabella Churchill, sister of John. This places him in excellent company since as you know this means his paternal grandmother was Henrietta Maria of France, the sister of Louis XIII . . . again, forgive the genealogical prattle. Will you please sort out everything to do with sorcerers, alchemists, Templars, and Satan-worshippers? I know that you got your start in life by bamboozling some rich alchemists into thinking you actually believed their nonsense. And yet you appear to be a sincere friend of the man called Enoch the Red, who is apparently an alchemist of note. From time to time, his name comes up around a gambling table. Most are nonplussed but certain men will cock an eyebrow or cough into a hand, exchange tremendously significant looks, et cetera , conspicuously trying not to be conspicuous. I have observed the same behaviors in connection with other subjects that are of an esoteric or occult nature. Everyone knows that Versailles was infested with Satan-worshippers, poisoners, abortionists,et cetera , in the late1670s and that most but not all of them were purged; but this only makes it seem murkier and more provocative now. The father of the Earl of Upnor – the Duke of Gunfleet – died suddenly in those days, after drinking a glass of water at a garden party thrown by Mme. la duchesse d'Oyonnax, whose own husband died in similar fashion a fortnight later, leaving all his titles and possessions to her. There is not a man or woman here who does not suspect poisoning in these and other cases. Upnor and Oyonnax would probably come in for closer scrutiny if there weren't so many other poisonings to distract people's attention. Anyway, Upnor is obviously one of those gentlemen who takes an interest in occult matters, and keeps making dark comments about his contacts at Trinity College in Cambridge. I am tempted to dismiss all of this as a faintly pathetic hobby for noble toffs bored out of their minds by the ingenious tedium, the humiliating inconsequence, of Versailles. But since I have picked out Upnor as an enemy I would like to know if it amounts to anything . . . can he cast spells on me? Does he have secret brethren in every city? What is Enoch Root? I am going to spend much of the winter in Holland and will write to you from there. Eliza Bank ofHet Kanaal, Between Scheveningen and the Hague DECEMBER 1687 No man goes so high as he who knows not where he is going. – CROMWELL 'WELL MET, BROTHER WILLIAM,' SAID Daniel, getting a boot up on the running-board of the carriage, vaulting in through the door, and surprising the hell out of a dumpling-faced Englishman with long stringy dark hair. The passenger snatched the hem of his long black frock coat and drew it up; Daniel could not tell whether he was trying to make room, or to avoid being brushed against by Daniel. Both hypotheses were reasonable. This man had spent a lot more time in ghastly English prisons than Daniel had, and learned to get out of other men's way. And Daniel was mud-spattered from riding, whereas this fellow's clothes, though severe and dowdy, were immaculate. Brother William had a tiny mouth that was pursed sphincter-tight at the moment. 'Recognized your arms on the door,' Daniel explained, slamming it to and reaching out the window to give it a familiar slap. 'Flagged your coachman down, reckoning we must be going to the same lodge to see the same gentleman.' 'When Adam delved and Eve span, who then was the Gentleman?' 'Forgive me, I should have said chap, bloke . . . how are things in your Overseas Possession, Mr. Penn? Did you ever settle that dispute with Maryland?' William Penn rolled his eyes and looked out the window. 'It will take a hundred years and a regiment of Surveyors to settle it! At least those damned Swedes have been brought to heel. Everyone imagines that, simply because I own the Biggest Pencil in the World, that my ticket is punched, my affairs settled once and for all . . . but I tell you, Brother Daniel, that it has been nothing but troubles . . . if it is a sin to lust after worldly goods, videlicet a horse or a door-knocker, then what have I got myself into now? It is a whole new universe of sinfulness.' “'Twas either accept Pennsylvania, or let the King continue owing you sixteen thousand pounds, yes?' Penn did not take his gaze away from the window, but squinted as if trying to hold back a mighty volume of flatulence, and shifted his focal point to a thousand miles in the distance. But this was coastal Holland and there was nothing out that window save the Curvature of the World. Even pebbles cast giant shadows in the low winter sun. Daniel could not be ignored. 'I am chagrined, appalled, mortified that you are here! You are not welcome, Brother Daniel, you are a problem, and obstacle, and if I were not a pacifist I would beat you to death with a rock.' 'Brother William, meeting as we so often do at Whitehall, in the King's Presence, to have our lovely chats about Religious Toleration, it is most difficult for us to hold frank exchanges of views, and so I am pleased you've at last found this opportunity to hose me down with those splenetic humours that have been so long pent up.' 'I am a plain-spoken fellow, as you can see. Perhaps you should say what you mean more frequently, Brother Daniel – it would make everything so much simpler.' 'It is easy for you to be that way, when you have an estate the size of Italy to go hiding in, on the far side of an ocean.' 'That was unworthy of you, Brother Daniel. But there is some truth in what you say . . . it is . . . distracting . . . at the oddest times . . . my mind drifts, and I find myself wondering what is happening on the banks of the Susquehanna . . .' 'Right! And if England becomes completely unlivable, you have someplace to go. Whereas I . . .' Finally Penn looked at him. 'Don't tell me you haven't considered moving to Massachusetts.' 'I consider it every day. Nonetheless, most of my constituency does not have that luxury available and so I'd like to see if we can avoid letting Olde Englande get any more fouled up than ‘tis.' Penn had disembarked from a ship out at Scheveningen less than an hour ago. That port-town was connected to the Hague by several roads and a canal. The route that Penn's driver had chosen ran along a canal-edge, through stretches of Dutch polder-scape and fields where troops drilled, which extended to within a few hundred yards of the spires of the Binnenhof. The carriage now made a left turn onto a gravel track that bordered an especially broad open park, called the Malieveld, where those who could afford it went riding when the weather was pleasant. No one was there today. At its eastern end the Malieveld gave way to the Haagse Bos, a carefully managed forest laced through with riding-paths. The carriage followed one of these through the woods for a mile, until it seemed that they had gone far out into the wild. But then suddenly cobblestones, instead of gravel, were beneath the wheel-rims, and they were passing through guarded gates and across counterweighted canal-bridges. The formal gardens of a small estate spread around them. They rolled to a stop before a gate-house. Daniel glimpsed a hedge and the corner of a fine house before his view out the carriage-window was blocked by the head, and more so by the hat, of a captain of the Blue Guards. 'William Penn,' said William Penn. Then, reluctantly, he added: 'And Dr. Daniel Waterhouse.' THE PLACE WAS BUT A small lodge, close enough to the Hague to be easily reached, but far enough away that the air was clean. William of Orange's asthma did not trouble him when he was here, and so, during those times of the year when he had no choice but to stick at the Hague, this was where he abided. Penn and Waterhouse were ushered to a parlor. It was a raw day outside, and even though a new fire was burning violently on the hearth, making occasional lunges into the room, neither Penn nor Waterhouse made any move to remove his coat. There was a girl there, a petite girl with large blue eyes, and Daniel assumed she was Dutch at first. But after she'd heard the two visitors conversing in English she addressed them in French, and explained something about the Prince of Orange. Penn's French was much better than Daniel's because he had spent a few years exiled to a Protestant college (now extirpated) in Saumur, so he exchanged a few sentences with the girl and then said to Daniel: 'The sand-sailing is excellent today.' 'Could've guessed as much from the wind, I suppose.' 'We'll not be seeing the Prince for another hour.' The two Englishmen stood before the fire until well browned on both sides, then settled into chairs. The girl, who was dressed in a rather bleak Dutch frock, set a pan of milk there to heat, then busied herself with some kitchen-fuss. It was now Daniel's turn to be distracted, for there was something in the girl's appearance that was vaguely disturbing or annoying to him, and the only remedy was to look at her some more, trying to figure it out; which made the feeling worse. Or perhaps better. So they sat there for a while, Penn brooding about the Alleghenies and Waterhouse trying to piece together what it was that provoked him about this girl. The feeling was akin to the nagging sense that he had met a person somewhere before but could not recall the particulars. But that was not it; he was certain that this was the first time. And yet he had that same unscratchable itch. She said something that broke Penn out of his reverie. Penn fixed his gaze upon Daniel. 'The girl is offended,' he said. 'She says that there may be women, of an unspeakable nature, in Amsterdam, who do not object to being looked at as you are looking at her; but how dare you, a visitor on Dutch soil, take such liberties?' 'She said a lot then, in five words of French.' 'She was pithy, for she credits me with wit. I am discursive, for I can extend you no such consideration.' 'You know, merely knuckling under to the King, simply because he waves a Declaration of Indulgence in front of your eyes, is no proof of wit – some would say it proves the opposite.' 'Do you really want another Civil War, Daniel? You and I both grew up during such a war – someof us have elected to move on – otherswant to re-live their childhoods, it seems.' Daniel closed his eyes and saw the image that had been branded onto his retinas thirty-five years ago: Drake hurling a stone saint's head through a stained-glass window, the gaudy image replaced with green English hillside, silvery drizzle reaching in through the aperture like the Holy Spirit, bathing his face. 'I do not think you see what we can make of England now if we only try. I was brought up to believe that an Apocalypse was coming. I have not believed that for many years. But the people who believe in that Apocalypse are my people, and their way of thinking is my way. I have only just come round to a new way of looking at this, a new view-point, as Leibniz would have it. Namely that there is something to the idea of an Apocalypse – a sudden changing of all, an overthrow of old ways – and that Drake and the others merely got the particulars wrong, they fixed on a date certain, they, in a word, idolized. If idolatry is to mistake the symbol for the thing symbolized, then that is what they did with the symbols that are set down in the Book of Revelation. Drake and the others were like a flock of birds who all sense that something is nigh, and take flight as one: a majestic sight and a miracle of Creation. But they were confused, and flew into a trap, and their revolution came to naught. Does that mean that they were mistaken to have spread their wings at all? No, their senses did not deceive them . . . their higher minds did. Should we spurn them forever because they erred? Is their legacy to be laughed at only? On the contrary, I would say that we might bring about the Apocalypse now with a little effort . . . not precisely the one they phant'sied but the same, or better, in its effects.' 'You really should move to Pennsylvania,' Penn mused. 'You are a man of parts, Daniel, and certain of those parts, which will only get you half-hanged, drawn, and quartered in London, would make you a great man in Philadelphia – or at least get you invited to a lot of parties.' 'I've not given up on England just yet, thank you.' 'England may prefer that you give up, rather than suffer another Civil War, or another Bloody Assizes.' 'Much of England sees it otherwise.' 'And you may number me in that party, Daniel, but a scattering of Nonconformists does not suffice to bring about the changes you seek.' 'True . . . but what of the men whose signatures are on these letters?' said Daniel, producing a sheaf of folded parchments, each one be-ribboned and wax-sealed. Penn's mouth shrank to the size of a navel and his mind worked for a minute. The girl came round and served chocolate. 'For you to surprise me in this way was not the act of a gentleman.' 'When Adam delved and Eve span . . .' 'Shut up! Do not trifle with me. Owning Pennsylvania does not make me any better than a Vagabond in the eyes of God, Daniel, but it serves as a reminder that I'm not to be trifled and toyed with.' 'And that, Brother William, is why I nearly killed myself to cross the North Sea on the front of a wind-storm, and galloped through frost and muck to intercept you – beforeyou met with your next King.' Daniel drew out a Hooke-watch and turned its ivory face toward the fire-light. 'There is still time for you to write a letter of your own, and put it on the top of this stack, if you please.' 'IWAS GOING TO ASK, do you have any idea how many people in Amsterdam want to kill you . . . but by coming up here, you seem to've answered the question: no,' said William, Prince of Orange. 'You had fair warning in my letter to d'Avaux, did you not?' 'It barely reached me in time . . . the brunt of the blow was absorbed by some big shareholders there, whom I held off from warning.' 'Francophiles.' 'No, the bottom has quite fallen out of that market, very few Dutchmen are selling themselves to the French nowadays. My chief enemies nowadays are what you would call Dutchmen of limited vision. At any rate, your Batavia charade caused no end of headaches for me.' 'Establishing a first-rate intelligence source at the Court of Louis XIV cannot come cheaply.' 'That insipid truism can be turned around easily: when it comes so dear, then I demand first-rate intelligence. What did you learn from the two Englishmen, by the way?' William glanced at a dirty spoon and flared his nostrils. A Dutch houseboy, fairer and more beautiful than Eliza, bustled over and began to clear away the gleaming, crusted evidence of a long chocolate binge. The clattering of the cups and spoons seemed to irritate William more than gunfire on a battlefield. He leaned back deep into his armchair, closed his eyes, and turned his face toward the fire. To him the world was a dark close cellar with a net-work of covert channels strung through it, frail and irregular as cobwebs, transmitting faint cyphers of intelligence from time to time, and so a fire broadcasting clear strong radiance all directions was a sort of miracle, a pagan god manifesting itself in a spidery Gothick chapel. Eliza did not speak until the boy was finished and the room had gone quiet again and the folds and creases in the prince's face had softened. He was a couple of years shy of forty, but time spent in sun and spray had given him the skin, and battles had given him the mentality, of an older man. 'Both believe the same things, and believe them sincerely,' Eliza said, referring to the two Englishmen. 'Both have been tested by suffering. At first I thought the fat one had been corrupted. But the slender one did not think so.' 'Maybe the slender one is naïve.' 'He is not naïve in that way. No, those two belong to a common sect, or something – they knew and recognized each other. They dislike each other and work at cross-purposes but betrayal, corruption, any straying from whatever common path they have chosen, these are inconceivable. Is it the same sect as Gomer Bolstrood?' 'No and yes. The Puritans are like Hindoos – impossibly various, and yet all of a type.' Eliza nodded. 'Why are you so fascinated by the Puritans?' William asked. It was not asked in a friendly way. He suspected her of some weakness, some occult motive. She looked at him like a little girl who had just been run over by a cart-wheel. It was a look that would cause most men to fall apart like stewed chickens. It didn't work. Eliza had noticed that William of Orange had a lot of gorgeous boys around him. But he also had a mistress, an Englishwoman named Elizabeth Villiers, who was only moderately beautiful, but famously intelligent and witty. The Prince of Orange would never make himself vulnerable by relying on one sex or the other; any lust he might feel for Eliza he could easily channel towards that houseboy, as Dutch farmers manipulated their sluice-gates to water one field instead of another. Or at least that was the message he wanted to convey, by keeping the company he did. Eliza sensed that she had quite inadvertently gotten into danger. William had found an inconsistency in her, and if it weren't explained to his satisfaction, he'd brand her as Enemy. And while Louis XIV kept his enemies in the gilded cage of Versailles, William probably had more forthright ways of dealing with his. The truth wasn't so bad after all. 'I think they are interesting,' she said, finally. 'They are so different from anyone else. So peculiar. But they are not ninehammers, they are formidable in the extreme; Cromwell was only a prelude, a practice. This Penn controls an estate that is stupefyingly vast. New Jersey is a place of Quakers, too, and different sorts of Puritans are all over Massachusetts. Gomer Bolstrood used to say the most startling things . . . overthrowing monarchy was the least of it. He said that Negroes and white men are equal before God and that all slavery everywhere must be done away with, and that his people would never let up until everyone saw it their way. ‘First we'll get the Quakers on our side, for they are rich,' he said, ‘then the other Nonconformists, then the Anglicans, then the Catholics, then all of Christendom.'' William had turned his gaze back to the fire as she spoke, signalling that he believed her. 'Your fascination with Negroes is very odd. But I have observed that the best people are frequently odd in one way or another. I have got in the habit of seeking them out, and declining to trust anyone who has no oddities. Your queer ideas concerning slavery are of no interest to me whatever. But the fact that you harbor queer ideas makes me inclined to place some small amount of trust in you.' 'If you trust my judgment, the slender Puritan is the one to watch,' Eliza said. 'But he has no vast territories in America, no money, no followers!' 'That is why. I would wager he had a father who was very strong, probably older brothers, too. That he has been checked and baffled many times, never married, never enjoyed even the small homely success of having a child, and has come to that time in his life when he must make his mark, or fail. This has become all confused, in his thinking, with the coming rebellion against the English King. He has decided to gamble his life on it – not in the sense of living or dying, but in the sense of making something of his life, or not.' William winced. 'I pray you never see that deep into me. ' 'Why? Perhaps ‘twould do you good.' 'Nay, nay, you are like some Fellow of the Royal Society, dissecting a living dog – there is a placid cruelty about you.' 'About me ? What of you ? To fight wars is kindness ?' 'Most men would rather be shot through with a broad-headed arrow than be described by you.' Eliza could not help laughing. 'I do not think my description of the slender one is at all cruel. On the contrary, I believe he will succeed. To judge from that pile of letters, he has many powerful Englishmen behind him. To rally that many supporters while remaining close to the King is very difficult.' Eliza was hoping, now, that the Prince would let slip some bit of information about who those letter-writers were. But William perceived the gambit almost before she uttered the words, and looked away from her. 'It is very dangerous,' he said. 'Rash. Insane. I wonder if I should trust a man who conceives such a desperate plan.' A bit of a silence now. Then one of the logs in the fireplace gave way in a cascading series of pops and hisses. 'Are you asking me to do something about it?' More silence, but this time the burden of response was on William. Eliza could relax, and watch his face. His face showed that he did not like being put in this position. 'I have something important for you to do at Versailles,' he admitted, 'and cannot afford to send you to London to tend to Daniel Waterhouse. But, where he is concerned, you might be more useful in Versailles anyway.' 'I don't understand.' William opened his eyes wide, took a deep breath, and sighed it out, listening clinically to his own lungs. He sat up straighter, though his small hunched body was still overwhelmed by the chair, and looked alertly into the fire. 'I can tell Waterhouse to be careful and he will say, ‘yes, sire,' but it is all meaningless. He will not really be careful until he has something to live for.' William looked Eliza straight in the eye. 'You want me to give him that?' 'I cannot afford to lose him, and the men who put their signatures on these letters, because he suddenly decides he cares not whether he lives or dies. I want him to have some reason to care.' 'It is easily done.' 'Is it? I cannot think of a pretext for getting the two of you in the same room together.' 'I have another oddity, sire: I am interested in Natural Philosophy.' 'Ah yes, you stay with Huygens.' 'And Huygens has another friend in town just now, a Swiss mathematician named Fatio. He is young and ambitious and desperate to make contacts with the Royal Society. Daniel Waterhouse is the Secretary. I'll set up a dinner.' 'That name Fatio is familiar,' William said distantly. 'He has been pestering me, trying to set up an audience.' 'I'll find out what he wants.' 'Good.' 'What of the other thing?' 'I beg your pardon?' 'You said you had something important for me to do at Versailles.' 'Yes. Come to me again before you leave and I'll explain it. Now I am tired, tired of talking. The thing you must do there for me is pivotal, everything revolves around it, and I want to have my wits about me when I explain it to you.' M. Descartes had found the way to have his conjectures and fictions taken for truths. And to those who read his Principles of Philosophy something happened like that which happens to those who read novels which please and make the same impression as true stories. The novelty of the images of his little particles and vortices are most agreeable. When I read the book . . . the first time, it seemed to me that everything proceeded perfectly; and when I found some difficulty, I believe it was my fault in not fully understanding his thought. . . . But since then, having discovered in it from time to time things that are obviously false and others that are very improbable, I have rid myself entirely of the prepossession I had conceived, and I now find almost nothing in all his physics that I can accept as true. . . . – HUYGENS, P. 186 OF WESTFALL'S 1971 The Concept of Force in Newton's Physics: The Science of Dynamics in the Seventeenth Century CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS SAT at the head of the table, the perihelion of the ellipse, and Daniel Waterhouse sat at the opposite end, the aphelion. Nicolas Fatio de Duilliers and Eliza sat across from each other in between. A dinner of roast goose, ham, and winter vegetables was served up by various members of a family that had long been servants in this house. Eliza was the author of the seating plan. Huygens and Waterhouse must not sit next to each other or they'd fuse together and never say a word to the others. This way was better: Fatio would only want to talk to Waterhouse, who would only want to talk to Eliza, who would pretend she had ears only for Huygens, and so the guests would pursue each other round the table clockwise, and with a bit of luck, an actual conversation might eventuate. It was near the time of the solstice, the sun had gone down in the middle of the afternoon, and their faces, lit up by a still-life of candles thrust into wax-crusted bottles, hung in the darkness like Moons of Jupiter. The ticking of Huygens's clock-work at the other end of the room was distracting at first, but later became part of the fabric of space; like the beating of their hearts, they could hear it if they wanted to, its steady process reassured them that all was well while reminding them that time was moving onwards. It was difficult to be uncivilized in the company of so many clocks. Daniel Waterhouse had arrived first and had immediately apologized to Eliza for having taken her for a house-servant earlier. But he had not dropped the other shoe and asked what she really was. She'd accepted his apology with tart amusement and then declined to offer any explanation. This was light flirtation of the most routine sort – at Versailles it would have elicited a roll of the eyes from anyone who had bothered to notice it. But it had been more than enough to plunge Waterhouse into utter consternation. Eliza found this slightly alarming. He had tried again: 'Mademoiselle, I would be less than . . .' 'Oh, speak English!' she'd said, in English. This had practically left him senseless: first, with surprise that she could speak English at all, then with alarm that she'd overheard his entire conversation with William Penn. 'Now, what was it you were saying?' He scrambled to remember what he had been saying. In a man half his age, to've been so flustered would have been adorable. As it stood, she was dismayed, wondering what would happen to this man the first time some French-trained countess got her talons into him. William had been right. Daniel Waterhouse was a Hazard to Navigation. 'Err . . . I'd be less than honest if, er . . .' he winced. 'It sounded gallant in French. Pompous in English. I was wondering . . . the state of international relations being so troublous and relations ‘tween the sexes more so, and etiquette being an area in which I am weak . . . whether there was any pretext at all under which I might converse with you, or send letters, without giving offense.' 'Isn't this dinner good enough?' she'd asked, flirtatiously mock-offended, and just then Fatio had arrived. In truth, she'd seen him coming across the Plein, and adjusted her timing accordingly. Waterhouse was obliged to stand off to one side and stew and draw up a great mental accompt of his failures and shortcomings while Eliza and Fatio enacted a greeting-ritual straight out of the Salon of Apollo at Versailles. This had much in common with a courtly dance, but with overtones of a duel; Eliza and Fatio were probing each other, emanating signals coded in dress, gesture, inflection, and emphasis, and watching with the brilliant alertness of sword-fighters to see whether the other had noticed, and how they'd respond. As one who'd lately come from the Court of the Sun King, Eliza held the high ground; the question was, what level of esteem should she accord Fatio? If he'd been Catholic, and French, and titled, this would have been settled before he came in the door. But he was Protestant, Swiss, and came from a gentle family of no particular rank. He was in his early twenties, Eliza guessed, though he tried to make himself older by wearing very good French clothes. He was not a handsome man: he had giant blue eyes below a high domelike forehead, but the lower half of his face was too small, his nose stuck out like a beak, and in general he had the exhausting intensity of a trapped bird. At some point Fatio had to tear those eyes away from Eliza and begin the same sort of dance- cum-duel with Waterhouse. Again, if Fatio had been a Fellow of the Royal Society, or a Doctor at some university, Waterhouse would have had some idea what to make of him; as it was, Fatio had to conjure his credentials and bona fides out of thin air, as it were, by dropping names and scattering references to books he'd read, problems he'd solved, inflated reputations he had punctured, experiments he had performed, creatures he had seen. 'I had half expected to see Mr. Enoch Root here,' he said at one point, looking about, 'for a (ahem) gentleman of my acquaintance here, an amateur of (ahem) chymical studies, has shared with me a rumor – only a rumor, mind you – that a man owning Root's description was observed, the other day, debarking from a canal-ship from Brussels.' As Fatio stretched this patch of news thinner and thinner, he flinched his huge eyes several times at Waterhouse. Certain French nobles would have winked or stroked their moustaches interestedly; Waterhouse offered up nothing but a basilisk-stare. That was the last time Fatio had anything to say concerning Alchemy; from that point onwards it was strictly mathematics, and the new work by Newton. Eliza had heard from both Leibniz and Huygens that this Newton had written some sort of discourse that had left all of the other Natural Philosophers holding their heads between their knees, and quite dried up the ink in their quills, and so she was able to follow Fatio's drift here. Though from time to time he would turn his attention to Eliza and revert to courtly posturing for a few moments. Fatio prosecuted all of these uphill strugglings with little apparent effort, which spoke well of his training, and of the overall balance of his humours. At the same time it made her tired just to watch him. From the moment he came in the door he controlled the conversation; everyone spent the rest of the evening reacting to Fatio. That suited Eliza's purposes well enough; it kept Daniel Waterhouse frustrated, which was how she liked him, and gave her leisure to observe. All the same, she wondered what supplied the energy to keep a Fatio going; he was the loudest and fastest clock in the room, and must have an internal spring keyed up very tight. He had no sexual interest whatever in Eliza, and that was a relief, for she could tell that he would be relentless and probably tiresome in wooing. Why didn't they just eject Fatio and have a peaceful dinner? Because he had genuine merit. Confronted by a nobody so desperate to establish his reputation, Eliza's first impulse (and Waterhouse's, too, she inferred) was to assume he was a poseur.But he was not. Once he figured out that Eliza wasn't Catholic he had interesting things to say concerning religion and the state of French society. Once he figured out that Waterhouse was no alchemist, he began to discourse of mathematical functions in a way that snapped the Englishman awake. And Huygens, when he finally woke up and came downstairs, made it obvious by his treatment of Fatio that he rated him as an equal – or as close to equal as a man like Huygens could ever have. 'A man of my tender age and meager accomplishments cannot give sufficient honor to the gentleman who once dined at this table – ' 'Actually Descartes dined here many times – not just once !' Huygens put in gruffly. “ – and set out his proposal to explain physical reality with mathematics,' Fatio finished. 'You would not speak of him that way unless you were about to say something against him,' Eliza said. 'Not against him, but some of his latter-day followers. The project that Descartes started is finished. Vortices will never do! I am surprised that Leibniz still holds out any hope for them.' Everyone sat up straighter. 'Perhaps you have heard from Leibniz more recently than I have, sir,' Waterhouse said. 'You give me more credit than I deserve, Doctor Waterhouse, to suggest that Doctor Leibniz would communicate his freshest insights to me, before despatching them to the Royal Society ! Please correct me.' 'It is not that Leibniz has any particular attachment to vortices, but that he cannot bring himself to believe in any sort of mysterious action at a distance.' Hearing this, Huygens raised a hand momentarily, as if seconding a motion. Fatio did not fail to notice. Waterhouse continued, 'Action at a distance is a sort of occult notion – which may appeal to a certain sort of mentality – ' 'But not to those of us who have adopted the Mechanical Philosophy that Monsieur Descartes propounded at this very table!' 'In that very chair, sir!' said Huygens, pointing at Fatio with a drumstick. 'I have my own Theory of Gravitation that should account for the inverse square relation,' Fatio said. 'As a stone dropped into water makes spreading ripples, so a planet makes concentric disturbances in the cœlestial æther, which press upon its satellites . . .' 'Write it down,' Waterhouse said, 'and send it to me, and we will print it alongside Leibniz's account, and may the better one prevail.' 'Your offer is gratefully accepted!' Fatio said, and glanced at Huygens to make sure he had a witness. 'But I fear we are boring Mademoiselle Eliza.' 'Not at all, Monsieur, any conversation that bears on the Doctor is of interest to me.' 'Is there any topic that does not relate to Leibniz in some way?' 'Alchemy,' Waterhouse suggested darkly. Fatio, whose chief object at the moment was to draw Eliza into the conversation, ignored this. 'I can't but wonder whether we may discern the Doctor's hand in the formation of the League of Augsburg.' 'I would guess not,' Eliza said. 'It has long been Leibniz's dream to re-unite the Catholic and Lutheran churches, and prevent another Thirty Years' War. But the League looks to me like a preparation for war. It is not the conception of the Doctor, but of the Prince of Orange.' 'The Protestant Defender,' Fatio said. Eliza was accustomed to hearing that phrase drenched in French sarcasm, but Fatio uttered it carefully, like a Natural Philosopher weighing an unproven hypothesis. 'Our neighbors in Savoy could have used some defending when de Catinat came through with his dragoons. Yes, in this matter I must disagree with the Doctor, as well-meaning as he is . . . we do need a Defender, and William of Orange will make a good one, provided he stays out of the clutches of the French.' Fatio was staring at Eliza while he said this. Huygens chuckled. 'That should not be difficult, since he never leaves Dutch soil.' 'But the coast is long, and mostly empty, and the French could put a force ashore anywhere they pleased.' 'French fleets do not sail up and down the Dutch coast without drawing attention,' Huygens said, still amused by the idea. Continuing to watch Eliza, Fatio replied, 'I said nothing about a fleet. A single jacht would suffice to put a boat-load of dragoons on the beach.' 'And what would those dragoons do against the might of the Dutch army?' 'Be destroyed, if they were stupid enough to encamp on the beach and wait for that army to mobilize,' Fatio answered. 'But if they happened to light on the particular stretch of beach where William goes sand-sailing, at the right time of the morning, why, they could redraw the map, and rewrite the future history, of Europe in a few minutes' work.' Now nothing could be heard for a minute or so except the clocks. Fatio still held Eliza fast with his vast eyes, giant blue lenses that seemed to take all the light in the room. What might they not have noticed, and what might the mind in back of them not know? On the other hand, what tricks could the mind not conjure up, and with those eyes, whom couldn't he draw into his snares? 'It is a clever conceit, like a chapter from a picaroon-romance,' Eliza said. Fatio's high brow shriveled, and the eyes that had seemed so penetrating a moment ago now looked pleading. Eliza glanced toward the stairs. 'Now that Fatio has provided us with entertainment, will you elevate us, Monsieur Huygens?' 'How should I translate that word?' Huygens returned. 'The last time one of your guests became elevated in my house, I had to look the other way.' 'Elevate us to the roof, where we may see the stars and planets, and then elevate our minds by showing us some new phenomenon through your telescope,' Eliza answered patiently. 'In company such as this we must all elevate one another, for I carry no advantage on these men,' Huygens said. This triggered a long tedious volley of self-deprecations from Fatio and Waterhouse. But soon enough they all got their winter coats on and labored up a staircase devious and strait, and emerged into starlight. The only clouds in this sky were those that condensed in front of their lips as they breathed. Huygens lit up a clay pipe. Fatio, who had assisted Huygens before, took the wraps off the big Newtonian reflector with the tense precision of a hummingbird, keeping an ear cocked toward Huygens and Waterhouse, who were talking about optics, and an eye on Eliza, who was strolling around the parapet enjoying the view: to the east, the Haagse Bos, woolly and black with trees. To the south, the smoking chimneys and glowing windows of the Hofgebied. To the west, the windy expanse of the Plein, stretching to the Grenadier's Gate on the far side, which controlled access to the Binnenhof. A lot of wax and whale-oil was being burnt there tonight, to illuminate a soiree in the palace's Ballroom. To the young ladies who had been invited, it must have seemed never so glamorous. To Huygens it was a damnable nuisance, for the humid air snared the radiance of all those tapers and lamps, and glowed faintly, in a way that most people would never notice. But it ruined the seeing of his telescope. Within a few minutes the two older men had gotten embroiled in the work of aiming the telescope at Saturn: a body that would show up distinctly no matter how many candles were burning at the Binnenhof. Fatio glided over to keep Eliza company. 'Now let us set aside formalities and speak directly,' she said. 'As you wish, Mademoiselle.' 'Is this notion of the jacht and the dragoons a phant'sy of yours or – ' 'Say if I am wrong: on mornings when the weather is not perfectly abominable, and the wind is off the sea, the Prince of Orange goes to his boat-house on the beach at Scheveningen at ten o'clock, chooses a sand-sailer, and pilots it northwards up the beach to the dunes near Katwijk – though on a clear day he'll venture as far as Noordwijk – then turns round and is back in Scheveningen by midday.' Not wanting to give Fatio the satisfaction of telling him he was right, Eliza answered, 'You have made a study of the Prince's habits?' 'No, but Count Fenil has.' 'Fenil – I have heard his name in the salon of the Duchess of Oyonnax – he originates in that place where Switzerland and Savoy, Burgundy, and the Piedmont are all convolved, yes?' 'Yes.' 'And he is Catholic, and a Francophile.' 'He is Savoyard in name, but he saw very early that Louis XIV would eclipse the Duke of Savoy, and swallow up his dominions, and so he became more French than the French, and served in the army of Louvois. That alone should prove his bona fides to the King of France. But after the recent show of force by the French Army next door to his lands, Fenil evidently feels some further demonstration of his loyalty is needed. So he has devised the plan I mentioned, of abducting William from the beach and carrying him back to France in chains.' They had now paused at a corner where they could look out over the Plein toward the Binnenhof. To Eliza this had seemed grand (at least by European standards) when d'Avaux had taken her skating there. Now that she'd grown accustomed to Versailles, it looked like a woodshed. Lit up for this evening's fête, it was as grand as it would ever be. William Penn would be there, and various members of the diplomatic corps – including d'Avaux, who had invited her to attend it on his arm. She had accepted, then changed her mind so that she could organize the present dinner. D'Avaux had not been happy about it and had asked questions that were difficult to answer. Once d'Avaux had recruited her, and sent her down to Versailles, their relationship had changed to that of lord and vassal. He had allowed her to see his hard, cruel, vengeful aspects, mostly as an implicit warning of what would come if she disappointed him. Eliza supposed it must have been d'Avaux who had supplied intelligence to Fenil concerning William's routine. It had been a mild winter so far, and the Hofvijver, in front of the Binnenhof, was a black rectangle, not yet frozen, reflecting gleams of candlelight from the party as gusts of wind wrinkled its surface. Eliza recalled her own abduction from a beach, and felt like crying. Fatio's yarn might or might not be true, but in combination with some cutting remarks that d'Avaux had made to her earlier, it had put real melancholy into her heart. Not connected with any one particular man, or plan, or outcome, but melancholy like the black water that ate up the light. 'How do you know the mind of M. le comte de Fenil?' 'I was visiting my father at Duillier – our seat in Switzerland – a few weeks ago. Fenil came on a visit. I went for a stroll with him and he told me what I have told you.' 'He must be an imbecile to talk about it openly.' 'Perhaps. Inasmuch as the purpose is to enhance his prestige, the more he talks about it, the better.' “'Tis an outlandish plan. Has he suggested it to anyone who could realize it?' 'Indeed, he proposed it to the Maréchal Louvois, who wrote back to him and directed him to make preparations.' 'How long ago?' 'Long enough, mademoiselle, for the preparations to have been made by now.' 'So you have come here to warn William?' 'I have been striving to warn him,' Fatio said, 'but he will not grant me an audience.' 'It is very strange, then, that you should approach me. What makes you believe that I have the ear of the Prince of Orange? I live at Versailles and I invest money for members of the Court of the King of France. I journey up this way from time to time to consult with my brokers, and to meet with my dear friend and client the comte d'Avaux. What on earth makes you believe that I should have any connection to William?' 'Suffice it to say, I know that you do,' Fatio returned placidly. 'Who else knows?' 'Who knows that bodies in an inverse square field move on conic sections? Who knows that there is a division between the Rings of Saturn?' 'Anyone who reads Principia Mathematica, or looks through a telescope, respectively.' 'And who has the wit to understand what he has read, or seen.' 'Yes. Anyone can possess Newton's book, few can understand it.' 'Just so, mademoiselle. And likewise anyone may observe you, or listen to gossip about you, but to interpret those data and know the truth requires gifts that God hoards jealously and gives out to very few.' 'Have you learned much of me, then, from talking to your brethren? For I know that they are to be found in every Court, Church, and College, and that they know each other by signs and code-words. Please do not be coy with me, Fatio, it is ever so tedious.' 'Coy? I would not dream of so insulting a woman of your sophistication. Yes, I tell you without reserve that I belong to an esoteric brotherhood that numbers many of the high and the mighty among its members; that the very raison d'être of that brotherhood is to exchange information that should not be spread about promiscuously; and that I have learned of you from that source.' 'Are you saying that my lord Upnor, and every other gentleman who pisses in the corridors of Versailles, knows of my connexion to William of Orange?' 'Most of them are poseurs with very limited powers of understanding. Do not change your plans out of some phant'sy that they will penetrate what I have penetrated,' Fatio said. Eliza, who did not find this a very satisfying answer, said nothing. Her silence caused Fatio to get that pleading look again. She turned away from him – the only alternative being to scoff and roll her eyes – and gazed down into the Plein. There something caught her eye: a long figure darkly cloaked, silver hair spilling out onto his shoulders. He had lately emerged from the Grenadiers' Gate, as if he had just excused himself from the party. A gust of steam flourished from his mouth as he shouted, 'How is the seeing tonight?' 'Much better than I should like,' returned Eliza. 'Bad, very bad, Mr. Root, because of our troublesome neighbor!' 'Do not be disheartened,' said Enoch the Red, 'I believe that Pegasus, to-night, shall be adorned by a meteor; turn your telescope thither.' Eliza and Fatio both turned and looked towards the telescope, which was situated cater-corner from them, meaning that Huygens and Waterhouse could neither hear nor see Enoch Root. When they turned back around, Root had turned his back on them, and was vanishing into one of the many narrow side-streets of the Hofgebied. 'Most disappointing! I was going to invite him up here . . . he must have come from the fête at the Binnenhof,' Fatio said. Eliza finished the thought herself: Where he was hobnobbing with my brethren of the Dutch court – the same ones who cannot keep their mouths shut concerning you, Eliza. Fatio looked toward Polaris. 'It is half past midnight, never mind what the church-bells say . . .' 'How can you tell?' 'By reading the positions of the stars. Pegasus is far to the west, there. It shall descend beneath the western horizon within two hours. A miserable place to make observations! And in any case, meteors come and go too quickly for one to aim a telescope at 'em . . . what did he mean?' 'Is this a fair sample of the esoteric brotherhood's discourse? No wonder that Alchemists are famed mostly for blowing up their own dwellings,' Eliza said, feeling somewhat relieved to get this glimpse into the mystery, and to find nothing but bafflement there. They spent the better part of an hour looking at, and arguing about, the gap in Saturn's rings, which was named after Cassini, the French royal astronomer, and which Fatio could explain mathematically. Which was to say that Eliza was cold, bored, and ignored. Only one person could peer into the telescope's eyepiece at a time, and these men quite forgot their manners, and never offered her a turn. Then Fatio persuaded the others to point the telescope into Pegasus, or those few stars of it that had not yet been drowned in the North Sea. The search of Pegasus was not nearly so interesting to them as Saturn had been, and so they let Eliza look all she wanted, sweeping the instrument back and forth, hoping to catch the predicted meteor. 'Have you found something, Mademoiselle?' Fatio asked at one point, when he noticed Eliza's stiff fingers pawing at the focusing-screw. 'A cloud, just peeking over the horizon.' 'Weather as fine as today's could never last,' said Huygens, in a fair sample of Dutch pessimism; for the weather had been wretched. 'Does it have the appearance of a rain-cloud or . . .' 'That is what I am trying to establish,' Eliza said, trying to bring it into focus. 'Enoch was having you on a bit,' Huygens said, for the others had by now told him the story of Enoch's enigmatic turn in the Plein. 'He felt his joints aching and knew a change in the weather was in the offing! And he knew it would come out of Pegasus since that is in the west, and that is where the wind is from. Very clever.' 'A few wisps of cloud, indeed . . . but what I first mistook for heavy rain-clouds, is actually a ship under sail . . . taking advantage of the moon-light to raise her sails, and make a run up the coast,' Eliza said. 'Cloth-smugglers,' Waterhouse predicted, 'coming in from round Ipswich.' Eliza stepped back and he took a turn at the eyepiece. 'No, I'm wrong, 'Tis the wrong sail-plan for a smuggler.' 'She is rigged for speed, but proceeding cautiously just now,' Huygens pronounced. Then it was Fatio's turn: 'I would wager she is bringing contraband from France – salt, wine, or both.' And so they continued, more and more tediously, until Eliza announced that she was going down to bed. SHE WAS AWAKENED BY THE tolling of a church-bell. For some reason she felt it was terribly important to count the strokes, but she woke up too late to be sure. She had left her long winter coat across the foot of her bed to make her toes a little warmer and she now sat up and snatched it and drew it round her shoulders in one quick movement, before the chill could rush through the porous linen of her nightgown. She swung her feet out of bed, poked at the pair of rabbit-pelt slippers on the floor to chase away any mice that might be using them as beds, and then pushed her feet into them. For in somewhat the same way as rodents may quietly set up house-keeping in one's clothing during the hours of darkness, an idea had established itself in Eliza's mind while she had been asleep. She did not become fully conscious of this idea until a few minutes later when she went into the great room to stoke up the fire, and saw all of Huygens's clocks reading the same time: a few minutes past nine o'clock in the morning. She looked out a window over the Plein and saw high white clouds. From the myriad chimneys of the Binnenhof, plumes of smoke trailed eastwards before a steady onshore breeze. Perfect day for sand-sailing. She went to the door of Huygens's bedchamber and raised a fist, then held off. If she were wrong, it were foolish to disturb him. If she were right, it were foolish to spend a quarter of an hour waking him up and trying to convince him. Huygens kept only a few horses here. The riding-fields of the Malieveld and the Koekamp lay only a musket-shot from the house, and so when he or any of his guests felt like going riding, they need only stroll to one of the many livery-stables that surrounded those places. Eliza ran out a back door of the house, nearly knocking down a Dutch woman out sweeping the pavement, and took off round the corner running in her rabbit-slippers. Then she faltered, remembering she'd not brought any money. 'Eliza!' someone shouted. She turned around to see Nicolas Fatio de Duilliers running up the street after her. 'Do you have money?' she called. 'Yes!' Eliza ran away from him and did not stop until she reached the nearest livery stable, a couple of hundred long strides away, far enough to get her heart pounding and her face flushed. By the time Fatio caught up with her she had wrapped up a negotiation with the owner; the Swiss mathematician came in the gate just in time to see Eliza thrusting a finger at him and shouting, 'and he pays!' Saddling the horses would take several minutes. Eliza felt on the verge of throwing up. Fatio was agitated, too, but breeding was at war with common sense in him, and breeding prevailed; he attempted to make conversation. 'I infer, Mademoiselle, that you too have received some communication from Enoch the Red on this morning?' 'Only if he came and whispered in my ear while I was sleeping!' Fatio didn't know what to make of that. 'I encountered him a few minutes ago at my usual coffee-house . . . he elaborated on his cryptic statement of last night . . .' 'What we saw last night was enough for me,' Eliza answered. A sleepy stable-boy dropped a saddle, and instead of bending to pick it up, tried to make some witty comment. The owner was doing sums with a quill-pen that wouldn't hold its ink. Tears of frustration came to Eliza's eyes. 'Damn it!' 'RIDING BARE-BACK IS LIKE RIDING, only more so,' Jack Shaftoe had said to her once. She preferred to remember Jack as little and as infrequently as possible, but now this memory came to her. Until the day they had met underneath Vienna, Eliza had never ridden a horse. Jack had taken obvious pleasure in teaching her the rudiments, more so when she seemed uncertain, or fell off, or let Turk run away with her. But after she had become expert, Jack had turned peevish and haughty, and lost no opportunity to remind her that riding well in a saddle was no accomplishment, and that until one learned to ride bare-back, one didn't know how to ride at all. Jack knew all about it, of course, because it was how Vagabonds stole horses. Choosing the proper mount was of the utmost importance (he had explained). Given a string or stable of horses to choose from, one wanted to pick a mount with a flat back, and yet not too wide-bodied or else it wouldn't be possible to get a good grip with the knees. The wither, or bony hump at the base of the neck, should not be too large (which would make it impossible to lie flat while galloping) nor too small (which gave no purchase for the hands), but somewhere in between. And the horse should be of a compliant disposition, for at some point it was bound to happen that the horse-thief would become disarranged on the horse's back, as the outcome of some bump or swerve, and then it would be entirely up to the horse whether the Vagabond would be flung off into space or coaxed back into balance. Now it might have been pure chance that Eliza's favorite horse in this stable – the mare she asked for by name whenever she called – possessed a flat but not overly broad back, a medium-sized wither, and a sweet disposition. Or perhaps Jack Shaftoe's advice on the finer points of horse-thievery had subtly informed her choice. At any rate, the mare's name was Vla (“cream'), and Eliza rated it as unlikely she would ever try to pitch Eliza off her bare back. The stable-boy was attempting to saddle up a different mare, but Vla was in a stall only a few paces away. Eliza walked over and opened the gate to that stall, greeting Vla by name, and then stepped forward until her nose was caressing the mare's, and breathed very gently into Vla's nostrils. This prompted Vla to raise her enormous head slightly, trying to draw closer to that warmth. Eliza cupped the mare's chin in her hand and exhaled into those nostrils again, and Vla responded with a little shudder of gratitude. Giant overlapping slabs of muscle twitched here and there, coming awake. Eliza now stepped into the stall, trailing a hand along the mare's side, and then used the stall's side-planks as a ladder, climbing to a level from which she was able to dive across Vla's back. Then, by gripping that convenient medium-sized wither with one hand, she was able to spin herself round on her belly and get her legs wrapped around Vla's body – this required pulling the narrow skirts of her nightgown up round her hips, but her coat hung down to either side and covered her legs. Her bare buttocks, thighs, and calves were pressed directly against the mare's body, which was exquisitely warm. Vla took this all calmly enough. She did not respond the first time Eliza pinched her bottom, but on the second pinch she walked out into the stable-yard, and when Eliza told her what a good girl she was and pinched her a third time she broke into a trot that nearly bounced Eliza straight off. Eliza flung herself full-length onto the mare's back and neck, and buried her face in the mane, and clenched a hank of the coarse hair in her teeth. All her attention was concentrated for those few moments on not falling off. The next time she looked around, they had trotted out into the street, pursued none too effectively by a few grooms and stable-hands who still could not make out whether they were witnessing a bizarre mishap or a criminal act. They were headed northwards along the edge of the riding-ground called Koekamp, which was limned on this side by the big canal that ran straight to Scheveningen. Vla wanted to turn her nose out of the stinging sea-wind and stray off into the Koekamp, which was what she did for a living. Every time her nose bent that way, Eliza gave her a sharp reprimand, and a dig on that side with her foot. So progress was balky, and relations between horse and rider were tense, as long as the Koekamp and then the Malieveld beckoned to their right. But once they had ridden clear of such temptations, Vla seemed to understand that they were riding up the canal to Scheveningen, and settled down noticeably. Another pinch caused Vla to break into a canter, which was both smoother and faster. Very soon after that Eliza was galloping down the canal-side hollering 'Make way in the name of the Stadholder!' whenever she saw anyone in the way. But this was rarely, for by now they were out in open country, and cows were more common than people. Jack had been right, she decided – remaining on the back of a galloping horse without benefit of saddle was a question of balance, and of anticipating the horse's movements, while also relying on some cooperation from the horse! Soon Vla began to sweat, which made her slippery, and then Eliza had to abandon all pretense of holding on by brute force and rely entirely on a very complicated and ever-changing sort of sympathy between her and the mare. Fatio did not catch up with her until she was most of the way to Scheveningen. They were being pursued, at a distance, by two men who were presumably members of the St. George Guild. As long as these did not draw close enough to loose any pistol-balls in their direction, they did not especially care. It could all be explained later. 'The ship . . . we saw . . .' Eliza shouted, forcing out the occasional word when not gasping for breath or being jolted by the mare. “'Twas the jacht ?' 'The same. . . . It is . . . Météore , the flagship . . . of the Duc . . . d'Arcachon! We may . . . assume it . . . to be full . . . of dragoons!' Fatio returned. Behind them, someone had begun blowing a horn from the top of a watch-tower in the Hague. It was a signal to the sheriff in Scheveningen, who was answerable to the town council of the Hague; very soon Fatio and Eliza would find out how diligent this sheriff was, and how well he had organized his watchmen. They reached the boat-house at Scheveningen at ten minutes past ten o'clock. As they approached, Eliza saw a sand-sailer out on the beach, being worked on by a ship-wright, and cried 'Aha!' thinking they'd arrived in time. But then she noticed wheel-tracks in the sand, and followed them north up the beach until she saw another sailer, already a mile away, heeled over by the sea-breeze. The boat-house was not really a single house, but a horseshoe-shaped compound of diverse sheds, shacks, and workshops scabbed on to one another, crammed with distracting detail: tools, forges, lathes, lofts. . . . Eliza got lost in that detail for a few moments, then turned around to look behind them, and discovered a landscape of pandemonium in their wake: breathless Guildsmen from the Hague, Blue Guards, marines from ships in the harbor, enraged members of Scheveningen's Watch, all seemingly contending with one another to lay hands first on Fatio – who was trying to explain everything in French. He was throwing unreadable looks at Eliza, half pleading for assistance, half wanting to defend her from the mob. 'Fire guns!' Eliza shouted in Dutch. 'The Prince is in danger.' Then she explained what she could, in what little Dutch she had. Nodding his head the whole time was the Captain of the Blue Guards, who, she collected, had always taken a dim view of the Prince's beach-sailing anyway. At some point he decided he had heard plenty. He fired a pistol in the air to silence the crowd and tossed the empty, smoking weapon to a guardsman, who tossed him a loaded one back. Then he uttered a few words in Dutch and everyone scattered. 'What did he say, mademoiselle?' Fatio asked. 'He said, ‘Guards, ride! Watchmen, fire! Sailors, launch! Others, get out of the way!' “ Fatio watched in fascination: a squadron of mounted Blue Guards took off hell-for-leather up the beach, galloping in pursuit of the Prince. Sailors were sprinting down towards the waterfront, the gunners on the harbor batteries were loading their cannons. Anyone with a loaded firearm was shooting in the air; but the Prince, far away in a cosmos of wind and surf, could not hear them. 'I suppose we belong in the category of ‘others,'' Fatio said, a bit dejectedly. 'It will be all right, I suppose . . . those cavalrymen will catch up to him anon.' The sun had found a rift in the high clouds and illuminated veils of steam rising from the sweaty coats of their horses. 'They'll never catch him,' Eliza demurred, 'in this wind he can out-sail them with ease.' 'Perhaps the Prince will take notice of that !' Fatio said, startled by a ragged volley of cannon-fire. 'He'll only assume it is a salute, for some ship approaching the harbor.' 'What can we do, then?' 'Follow orders. Leave,' Eliza said. 'Then pray tell why are you dismounting?' 'Fatio, you are a gentleman,' Eliza called over her shoulder, kicking off the rabbit-pelts and stepping barefoot across the sand towards the other sailer. 'You grew up near Lake Geneva. Do you know how to sail?' 'Mademoiselle,' said Fatio, dismounting, 'on a rig of this plan I can out-sail a Dutchman. I want only one thing.' 'Name it.' 'The craft will heel over. The sail will spill wind and I will lose speed. Unless I had someone small, nimble, tenacious, and very brave, to lean out of the vehicle on the windward side, and act as a counterweight.' 'Let us go and defend the Defender then,' Eliza said, climbing aboard. THEY COULD NOT POSSIBLY BE moving as fast as it seemed, or so Eliza told herself until they caught up with the squadron of Blue Guards. With a twitch of the tiller Fatio could have veered round them as if they were standing still. Instead he let out the main-sheet and spilled a huge dollop of air, causing the sailer to drop to what felt like a slow walking pace – and yet they were staying abreast of the galloping Guards. The sailer dropped back onto all three wheels and Eliza, leaning way out on what had been the high side, nearly planted her head in the sand. Fortunately she was gripping with both hands a line that Fatio had hitched round the mast, and by pulling hard on this she was able to draw herself up faster than the zooming sand could lunge at her. And now she had a few moments to wipe spray and grit out of her face, and to tie her hair into a sodden knot that lay cold and rough against her neck. Fatio had got the attention of some of the Blue Guards by gesticulating and shouting in a hotchpotch of languages. Something came flying towards them, tumbling end-over-end, plopped into the mainsail, and slid down the curved canvas into Fatio's lap: a musket. Then another, flung by a different Guard, whirled just over their heads and embedded itself barrel-first in the sand, surf swirling around its stock, and fell away aft. Now a pistol came flying toward them and Eliza, finally ready, was able to reach up and slap it out of the air with one hand. Instantly Fatio hauled in on the sheet and the sailer hurled itself forward. He got in front of the foremost of the Guards and then veered up away from the surf onto drier and firmer sand. Eliza had had time to shove the pistol into her coat-sash now, and to get that rope wrapped securely round her hands; Fatio hauled the sheet in recklessly, and the sailer bit so fiercely into the wind that it nearly capsized. One of its wheels was spinning in the air, flinging sand and water at Eliza, who clambered over its rim, planted both of her bare feet on the end of the axle, and let the rope slither through her numb hands until she was leaning back almost horizontally and gazing (when she could see anything) at the undercarriage of the sand-sailer. It occurred to her to wonder whether they were now traveling faster than any human beings had ever gone. For a minute she fancied it was so – then the Natural Philosopher in her weighed in with the observation that ice-boats had less friction to contend with and probably went even faster. Then why was she so exhilarated? Because despite the cold and the danger and the uncertainty of what they might find at the end of the journey, she had a kind of freedom here, a wildness she had not known since her Vagabond days with Jack. All the cares and intrigues of Versailles were forgotten. Craning her neck around, she was able to look out to sea. There was the normal clutter of coastal traffic, but mostly these vessels had triangular sails. The square-rigged jacht of the duc d'Arcachon should be conspicuous. Indeed, she thought she could see a square-rigger standing off several leagues from shore, a short distance to the north – that must be Météore ! The longboat would have come in at dawn and been hauled up on the beach so that the Prince would not notice it until too late. Fatio had been raving for some minutes about the Bernoullis – Swiss mathematicians, therefore friends and colleagues of his. 'Sail-makers of a hundred years ago phant'sied that sails worked as literal wind-bags, which is why ships in old pictures all have a big-bellied appearance that is very odd to our modern eyes, as if they need to be taken in . . . now we have learned that sails develop force by virtue of air-currents to either side, shaping, and shaped by, the curve of the canvas . . . but we understand not the particulars . . . the Bernoullis are making this their field of specialization . . . soon we'll be able to use my calculus to loft sails according to rational principles. . . .' ' Yourcalculus!?' 'Yes . . . and it will enable us to attain speeds even . . . better . . . than . . . this !' 'I see him!' Eliza shouted. Fatio's view ahead was blocked by sail and rigging, but Eliza was in the clear, and she could see the top of William's mast protruding above a low hummock of sand and beach-scrub. The Prince's sailer was heeled over, but not so much as theirs, since he lacked a human counter-weight. He was perhaps half a mile ahead. Halfway between them, but coming up on them rapidly, was the said hummock, which (Eliza realized) was just the sort of visual obstacle behind which the dragoons would want to set up their ambuscade. And indeed she could see the mast of William's sailer swinging up to vertical as he faltered and lost speed . . . 'It is happening now,' she shouted. 'Would you like me to stop and let you off, mademoiselle, or – ' 'Don't be foolish.' 'Very well!' Fatio now steered the sailer in a slashing arc around the end of the hummock. In that moment a mile of open beach was revealed to them. Straight ahead and alarmingly close was a longboat, still cluttered with branches that had been laid over it as camouflage. This had just been dragged out of a hiding place on the north face of the hummock and was now being hauled and shoved down toward the water by half a dozen hefty French dragoons. At the moment its keel was slicing directly across the tracks that had been laid in the sand by William's sailer a few seconds ago. It was cutting off the Prince's line of retreat – and it barred Eliza and Fatio's advance. Fatio jerked on the tiller and steered up-slope, round behind the boat. Eliza could only hold her rope. She clenched her teeth so that she would not bite off her tongue, and kept her eyes closed through a series of jolts. The wheels that were on the ground plunged across the furrow that had been cut by the longboat's keel, and the one that was in the air smashed into the head of a startled dragoon and felled him like a statue. The trim of the sails and balance of the vehicle were now all awry, and there was some veering and bouncing as Fatio brought matters in hand again. Sheer speed was not as important as it had been, and so Eliza put her whole weight on the hand-rope, raised her knees, and swung inwards far enough to plant her feet near the mast of the sailer. Fatio settled into a slower pace. They both looked up the beach. A bow-shot ahead of them, another contingent of half a dozen dragoons were running in pursuit of the Prince of Orange's sand-sailer. This had come to a stop before a barrier consisting of a chain stretched along a row of pilings that the Frenchmen had apparently pounded into the sand. The ambushers all had their backs to Eliza and Fatio, and their attention fixed upon the Prince, who had clambered out of his sailer and turned round to face the attackers. William strode free of his sailer, shrugged his cape off into the sand, reached round himself, and drew his sword. Fatio sailed into the line of dragoons, taking two of them, including their captain, from behind. But this was the end of his and Eliza's sand-sailing career, for the vehicle planted its nose in the sand and tumbled over smartly. Eliza landed face-first in wet sand and sensed wreckage slamming down near her, but nothing touched her save a few snarled wet ropes. Still, these were an impediment to getting up. When she struggled to her feet, all water-logged, sand-covered, cold, and battered, she discovered that she'd lost the pistol; and by the time she'd pulled it up out of the sand, the action at this end of the beach was over – William's sword, which had been bright a moment ago, was red now, and two dragoons were lying on sand clutching at their vitals. Another was being held at bay by Fatio with his musket, and the sixth member of the squad was running toward the longboat, waving his arms over his head and shouting. The longboat was in the surf now, ready to convey the dragoons and their prisoner back out to Météore. After a short discussion, four of the men who'd dragged it down the beach detached themselves and took off running towards the stopped sand-sailers while another stayed behind to mind the boat's bow-rope. The sixth member of that contingent was still face-down in the sand with a wheel-track running over his back. Eliza had not been noticed yet. She crouched down behind the broken frame of the sand-sailer and devoted a few moments to examining the firing-mechanism of the pistol, trying to brush out the sand while leaving some powder in the pan. Hearing a scream, she looked up to see that William had simply walked up to the captured dragoon and run him through with his sword. Then the prince took the musket from Fatio, dropped to one knee, took careful aim, and fired toward the five dragoons now running toward them. Not a one of them seemed to take any notice. Eliza lay down on her belly and began crawling south down the beach. In a moment the dragoons ran past her, about ten paces off to her left. As she'd hoped, none of them noticed her. They had eyes only for the two men, William and Fatio, who now stood, swords drawn, back to back, waiting. Eliza clambered to her feet and shed her long heavy coat. Before boarding the sand-sailer at Scheveningen, she'd borrowed Fatio's dagger and used it to slit the skirt of her nightgown and cut off the bottom few inches, freeing her legs. She sprinted toward the longboat. She was dreading the sound of pistols or muskets, which would mean that the dragoons had decided to drop William and Fatio on the spot. But she heard nothing except surf. The Frenchmen must have orders to bring the Prince back alive. Fatio was unknown to them and wholly expendable, but they could not shoot at him without hitting William of Orange. The solitary dragoon holding the longboat's bow-rope watched, dumbfounded, as Eliza ran towards him. Even if he hadn't been dumbfounded there was nothing he could have done save stand there; if he dropped the rope, the boat would be lost, and he lacked the strength to beach it unaided. As Eliza drew closer she observed that this fellow had a pistol stuck in his waistband. But since the troughs of the waves were around his hips, and the crests wrapped themselves around his chest, the weapon was no cause for concern. Eliza planted herself on the shore, took out the pistol, cocked the hammer, and took dead aim at the dragoon from perhaps ten paces. 'This may fire or it may not,' she said in French. 'You have until I count to ten to decide whether you'll gamble your life and your immortal soul on it. One . . . two . . . three . . . did I mention I'm on the rag? Four . . .' He lasted until seven. It was not the pistol that concerned him so much as her overall jaggedness, the look in her eye. He dropped the rope in the sea, raised his hands, and sidled up onto the beach, keeping well clear of Eliza, then turned and took off running toward the other group. ‘Twas not a bad play. If he'd stayed, the pistol might have fired, and he'd be dead and they'd lose the boat for certain. But there was a good chance that they could get it back from Eliza if he got help from the others. Eliza let the hammer down gently, tossed the pistol into the longboat, waded out a few steps, reached up over her head to grip the boat's transom, and hauled herself up. After a few kicks she was able to get an ankle hooked over the top of the transom, and then she brought herself up out of the water and rolled sideways over the stern and dropped into the bottom of the boat. Her first view was of a caulked sea-chest. Pulling herself up on it, she saw that it was one of several massive lockers that rested on the deck. Presumably they contained weapons. But if it came to gunplay they were all lost. The weapons she needed were oars, and these were lying out in plain sight on the boat's simple plank benches. She tried to snatch one up and was dismayed to find it was twice as long as she was tall, too heavy and unwieldy to be snatched; but at any rate she heaved it up off the benches and rotated its blade down into the water. Standing in the stern, where the water under the keel was shallowest, she stabbed down through the surf and into the firm sand. The longboat was reluctant to move, and one who had not recently familiarized herself with the contents of Isaac Newton's Principia Mathematica might have given up. But the elemental precepts of that work were certain laws of motion that stated that, if she pushed on the oar, the boat had to move; at first it might move too slowly to be perceived, but it had to be moving. Eliza ignored the unreliable evidence of her senses, which were telling her that the boat was not moving at all, and pushed steadily with all her might. Finally she felt the oar's angle change as the boat moved out from shore. The moment she pulled the oar out, wind and surf began pushing her back, sapping the vis inertiae she had imparted to the longboat. She planted the oar a second time. The water seemed very little deeper than the first time around. She wanted in the worst way to look up the beach, but looking would not do any good. Only getting the boat clear of the beach would serve their purposes. And so she waited until she had planted the oar half a dozen times, and doubled her distance from the surf-line, before she dared to look up. Fatio was down. A dragoon was sitting on him, holding something near his head. William was at bay, sword still drawn, but surrounded by four dragoons who were leveling guns at him. One of these seemed, from his stance and his gestures, to be talking to the Prince – negotiating terms of surrender, Eliza guessed. The dragoon who had been left behind to hold the longboat's bow-rope had finally reached the others and was gesticulating, trying to get their attention. The ones who surrounded William ignored him, but the one who was sitting on Fatio took notice, and looked at Eliza. Eliza glanced toward shore and perceived that the surf had pushed her back in a few yards; the water below the longboat was only waist-deep. In a hurry now, she planted the oars in their locks, sat down, and began to row. Her first several strokes were useless, as the seas, summing and subtracting chaotically, exposed the blades of one or both oars so that they flailed and skittered across the surface. But the dragoons were re-deploying themselves with admirable coolness and she decided she'd better learn from their example. She half-stood and raised the oar-handles high, driving the blades deep, and fell back, thrusting with her legs and arching her body backwards, and felt the boat move. Then she did it again. Fatio was unguarded and unmoving. William was bracketed between two dragoons who were leveling muskets at his head. The remaining four Frenchmen had run down the beach and were now staring at Eliza across perhaps fifty feet of rough water. One of them had already stripped off most of his clothes, and as Eliza stood up for another oar-stroke she saw him race out into the surf several paces and dive in. The remaining three knelt in the sand, aimed their muskets at the boat, and waited for Eliza to show herself again. By crouching in the bilge she could remain out of their line of fire – but she couldn't row the longboat. A hand gripped the gunwale. Eliza smashed it with the butt of the pistol and it went away. But a minute later it reappeared, bleeding, somewhere else – followed by another hand, then elbows, then a head. Eliza aimed the pistol between the blinking eyes and pulled the trigger; the flint whipped around and cast off a feeble spark but nothing further happened. She turned the weapon around, thinking to smash him on the head, but he raised a hand to parry the blow, and she thought better of it. Instead she stood up, gripped the handles of a gun-chest, heaved it up off the deck, and, just as he was whipping one leg over the gunwale, launched it into his face with a thrust of her hips. He fell off the boat. The dragoons on the shore opened fire and splintered a bench, but they missed Eliza. Still, the sight of those craters of fresh clean wood that had been torn into the benches crushed any sense of relief she might have felt over getting rid of the swimmer. She had an opportunity now to pull on the oars several times while the dragoons re-loaded. As she stood up for an oar-stroke, movement caught her eye off to the south. She turned that way to see a dozen of the Prince's Blue Guards cresting the hummock, or circumventing it along the beach, all riding at a dead gallop on foaming and exhausted chargers. As they took in the scene ahead they stood up in their stirrups, raised sabers high, and erupted in shouts of mixed indignation and triumph. Disgustedly, the French dragoons all flung their weapons down into the sand. 'YOU MUST NOT COME NEAR me now for a good long while,' said William of Orange. 'I shall make arrangements to spirit you out of this place, and my agents shall spread some story or other that shall account for your whereabouts this morning.' The Prince paused, distracted by shouts from the far side of a dune. One of the Blue Guards ran up onto its crest and announced he had found fresh horse-tracks. A rider had tarried for some time recently there (the manure of his horse was still warm) and smoked some tobacco, and then galloped away only moments ago (the sand disturbed by his horse's hooves was still dry). On hearing this news three of the Blue Guards spurred their horses into movement and took off in pursuit. But those mounts were exhausted, whereas the spy's had been well rested – everyone knew the pursuit would be bootless. “'Twas d'Avaux,' William said. 'He would be here, so that he could come out of hiding and taunt me after I had been put in chains.' 'Then he knows about me!' 'Perhaps, and perhaps not,' said the Prince, showing a lack of concern that did nothing for Eliza's peace of mind. He glanced curiously at Fatio, who was sitting up now, having a bloody head-wound bandaged. 'Your friend is a Natural Philosopher? I shall endow a chair for him at the university here. You, I will proclaim a Duchess, when the time is right. But now you must return to Versailles, and make love to Liselotte.' “What!?' 'Do not put on this show of outrage, it is very tedious. You know what I am, I think, and so you must know what she is.' 'But why ?' 'That is a more intelligent question. What you have just witnessed here, Eliza, is the spark that ignites the pan, that fires the musket, that ejects the ball, that fells the king. If you do nothing else today, fix that clearly in your mind. Now I have no choice but to make Britain mine. But I shall require troops, and I dare not pull so many of them from my southern marches while Louis menaces me there. But if, as I expect, Louis decides to enlarge his realms at the expense of the Germans, he'll draw off his forces on his Dutch flank, and free me to send mine across the North Sea.' 'But what has this to do with Liselotte?' 'Liselotte is the grand-daughter of the Winter Queen – who, some say, sparked the Thirty Years' War by accepting the crown of Bohemia. At any rate the said Queen spent most of those Thirty Years just yonder, in the Hague – my people sheltered her, for Bohemia was by then a shambles, and the Palatinate, which was rightfully hers, had fallen to the Papists as a spoil of that war. But when the Peace of Westphalia was finally signed, some forty years ago now, the Palatinate was returned to that family; the Winter Queen's eldest son, Charles Louis, became Elector Palatinate. Various of his siblings, including Sophie, moved there, and set up housekeeping in Heidelberg Castle. Liselotte is the daughter of that same Charles Louis, and grew up in that household. Charles Louis died a few years ago and passed the crown to the brother of Liselotte, who was demented – he died not long ago conducting a mock-battle at one of his Rhine-castles. Now the succession is in dispute. The King of France has very chivalrously decided to take the side of Liselotte, who, after all, is his sister-in-law now.' 'It is very adroit,' Eliza said. 'By extending a brotherly hand to Madame, Le Roi can add the Palatinate to France.' 'Indeed, it would be a pleasure to watch Louis XIV go about his work, if he were not the Antichrist,' William said. 'I cannot help Liselotte and I can do nothing for the poor people of the Palatinate. But I can make France pay for the Rhine with the British Isles.' 'You need to know if Le Roi intends to move his regiments away from your borders, towards the Rhine.' 'Yes. And no one is in a better position to know that than Liselotte – if not precisely a pawn, she is a sort of captured queen, on France's side of the board.' 'If the stakes are that high, then I suppose the least I can do is contrive some way to get close to Liselotte.' 'I don't want you to get close to her, I want you to seduce her, I want you to make her your slave. ' 'I was trying to be delicate.' 'My apologies!' William said with a courtly bow, looking her up and down. Covered in salt and sand, and wrapped up in a bloody dragoon-coat, Eliza couldn't have looked delicate at all. William looked as if he were on the verge of saying as much. But he thought better of it, and looked away. 'You have ennobled me, my prince. It was done some years ago. You have grown used to thinking of me as a noblewoman, even if that is only a secret between you and me. To Versailles I am still a commoner, and a foreigner to boot. As long as this remains true you may be assured that Liselotte will have nothing to do with me.' ' In public.' 'Even in private! Not everyone there is as much of a hypocrite as you seem to think.' 'I did not say it would be easy. This is why I am asking you to do it.' 'As I said, I am willing to give it a try. But if d'Avaux has seen me here today, going back to Versailles would seem unwise.' 'D'Avaux prides himself on playing a deep and subtle game, and that is his weakness,' William announced. 'Besides, he depends on your financial advice. He will not crush you immediately. ' ' Later,then?' 'He'll try to,' William corrected her. 'And he will succeed.' 'No. For by that point you will be the mistress of Madame – Liselotte – the King's sister-in-law. Who has her rivals and her weaknesses, true – but who is of infinitely higher rank than d'Avaux.' Versailles EARLY 1688 To Leibniz, February 3, 1688 Doctor, Madame has graciously offered to send this letter to Hanover along with some others that her friend is carrying personally to Sophie, and so I'll dispense with the cypher. You may wonder why Madame is offering such courtesies to me now, since in the past she has always viewed me as a mouse turd in the pepper. It seems that as the King of France was rising one day recently, he remarked, to the nobles who were attending his getting-out-of-bed ceremony, that he had heard that 'the woman from Qwghlm' was secretly of noble blood. It was a secret even to me until an hour or so later, when I heard someone calling for 'Mademoiselle la comtesse de la Zeur,' which (as I slowly figured out) is their way of trying to pronounce Sghr. As you may know, my island is a well-known Hazard to Navigation, recognizable, to terrified sailors, by its three towers of rock, which we denote by that name. Evidently some courtier, who had been so reckless as to sail within view of Qwghlm at some point, remembered this detail and concocted a title for me. To the Court ladies here, especially those of ancient families, it has a savage ring to it. Fortunately there are many foreign princesses here who do not have such exacting standards, and they have already sent minions around to invite me to parties. Of course Kings may ennoble commoners whenever they please, and so it isn't clear to me why someone has gone to the trouble of making me out to be a hereditary noble. Here is a clue, though: Father Édouard de Gex has been asking me questions about the Qwghlmian Church, which is not technically Protestant in that it was founded before the Roman Catholic Church was established (or at least before anyone notified the Qwghlmians). The Father speaks of going to visit Qwghlm to seek out proofs that our faith is really no different from his and that the two should be merged. Meanwhile I keep hearing expressions of sympathy from various French nobles, who cluck their tongues over the barbaric occupation of my homeland by England. In fact, every Qwghlmian would be pleased if Englishmen did come and occupy our Island, for presumably they would bring some food and warm clothes. I suspect that Louis knows he may soon see a sworn enemy sitting on the throne of England, and is making ready to out-flank that foe by shoring up relations with places such as Ireland, Scotland, and that flyspeck of rock where I was born. It has been ages since Qwghlm had hereditary nobles (nine hundred years ago the Scots rounded them all up and sealed them into a cave with some bears), but now they have decided I am one. Mother would have been so proud! According to the date at the top of your last letter, you penned it while you were paying a visit to Sophie's daughter at the Court of Brandenburg around the time of Christmas. Please tell me what Berlin is like! I know that many Huguenots have ended up there. It is strange to consider that only a few years ago Sophie and Ernst August were offering their daughter's hand in marriage to Louis XIV. Yet now Sophie Charlotte is Electress of Brandenburg instead, and (if the rumors are to be believed) presiding over a salon of religious dissidents and free-thinkers in Berlin. If the marriage had gone the other way she would bear a measure of responsibility for putting the very same men to death or slavery. I can't help but suppose she is happier where she is. They say that Sophie Charlotte participates in the discussions of those savants with ever so much poise and confidence. I can't help but suppose that this is because she grew up around you, Doctor, and listened to the conversations you had with her mother. Now that I am reckoned a Countess, and am considered fit to exchange chit-chat with Madame, I have begged her to tell me what you and Sophie talk about at Hanover. But she only rolls her eyes and claims that erudite talk makes no sense to her. I believe that she has spent too much time around self-styled Alchemists, and suspects that all such talk is rubbish. The Star Chamber, Westminster Palace APRIL 1688 For to accuse, requires less eloquence, such is man's nature, than to excuse; and condemnation, than absolution more resembles justice. – Hobbes, Leviathan 'HOW DOES THE SAYING GO? ‘All work and no play . . . a dull boy,' said a disembodied voice. It was the only perception that Daniel's brain was receiving at the moment. Vision, taste, and the other senses were dormant, and memory did not exist. This made it possible for him to listen with more-than-normal acuteness to the voice, and to appreciate its fine qualities – of which there were many. It was a delicious voice, belonging to an upper-class man who was used to being listened to, and who liked it that way. 'This boy's lucubrations have made him very dull indeed, he is a very sluggard!' the voice continued. A few men chuckled, and shifted bodies sheathed in silk. The sounds echoed from a high and hard ceiling. Daniel's mind now recollected that it was attached to a body. But like a regiment that has lost contact with its colonel, the body had not received any orders in a long time. It had gone all loose and discomposed, and had stopped sending signals back to headquarters. 'Give him more water!' commanded the beautiful voice. Daniel heard boots moving on a hard floor to his left, felt blunt pressure against numbed lips, heard the rim of a bottle crack against one of his front teeth. His lungs began to fill up with some sort of beverage. He tried to move his head back but it responded sluggishly, and something cold hit him on the back of the neck hard enough to stop him. The fluid was flooding down his chin now and trickling under his clothes. His whole thorax clenched up trying to cough the fluid out of his lungs, and he tried to move his head forward – but now something cold caught him across the throat. He coughed and vomited at the same moment and sprayed hot humours all over his lap. 'These Puritans cannot hold their drink – really one cannot take them anywhere.' 'Save, perhaps, to Barbados, my Lord!' offered up another voice. Daniel's eyes were bleary and crusted. He tried raising his hands to his face, but halfway there each one of them collided with a bar of iron that was projecting across space. Daniel groped at these, but dire things happened to his neck when he did, and so he ended up feeling around them to paw at his eyes and wipe grit and moisture away from his face. He could make out now that he was sitting on a chair in the middle of a large room; it was night, and the place was lit up by only a modest number of candles. The light gleamed from white lace cravats round the throats of several gentlemen who were arranged round Daniel in a horseshoe. The light wasn't bright enough, and his vision wasn't clear enough, to make sense of this ironmongery that was about his neck, so he had to explore that with his hands. It seemed to be a band of iron bent into a neck-ring. From four locations equally spaced around its circumference rods of iron projected outwards like spokes from a wheel-hub, to a radius of perhaps half a yard, where each split into a pair of back-curved barbs, like the flukes of grappling-hooks. 'While you were sleeping off the effects of M. LeFebure's draught, I took the liberty of having you fitted out with new neckwear,' said the voice, 'but as you are a Puritan, and have no use for vanity, I called upon a blacksmith instead of a tailor.You'll find that this is all the mode in the sugar plantations of the Caribbean.' The barbs sticking out behind had gotten lodged in the back of the chair when Daniel had unwisely tried to sit forward. Now he gripped the ones in front and pushed himself back hard, knocking the rear ones free. Momentum carried him and the collar back; his spine slammed into the chair and the collar kept moving and tried to shear his head off. He ended up with his head tilted back, gazing almost straight up at the ceiling. His first thought was that candles had somehow been planted up there, or burning arrows shot at random into the ceiling by bored soldiery, but then his eyes focused and he saw that the vault had been decorated with painted stars that gleamed in the candle-light from beneath. Then he knew where he was. 'The Court of Star Chamber is in session – Lord Chancellor Jeffreys presiding,' said another excellent voice, husky with some kind of precious emotion. And what sort of man got choked up over this ? Now just as Daniel's senses had recovered one at a time, beginning with his ears, so his mind was awakening piece-meal. The part of it that warehoused ancient facts was, at the moment, getting along much better than the part that did clever things. 'Nonsense . . . the Court of Star Chamber was abolished by the Long Parliament in 1641 . . . five years before I was born , or you were, Jeffreys.' 'I do not recognize the self-serving decrees of that rebel Parliament,' Jeffreys said squeamishly. 'The Court of Star Chamber was ancient – Henry VII convened it, but its procedures were rooted in Roman jurisprudence – consequently, 'twas a model of clarity, of effiency, unlike the time-encrusted monstrosity of Common Law, that staggering, cobwebbed Beast, that senile compendium of folklore and wives' tales, a scabrous Colander seiving all the chunky bits out of the evanescent flux of Society and compacting 'em into legal head-cheese.' 'Hear, hear!' said one of the other Judges, who apparently felt that Jeffreys had now encompassed everything there was to be said about English Common Law. Daniel assumed they must all be judges, at any rate, and that they'd been hand-picked by Jeffreys. Or, more like it, they'd simply gravitated to him during his career, they were the men that he always saw, whenever he troubled to glance around him. Another one of them said, 'The late Archbishop Laud found this Chamber to be a convenient facility for the suppression of Low Church dissidents, such as your father, Drake Waterhouse.' 'But the entire point of my father's story is that he was not suppressed – Star Chamber cut his nose and his ears off and it only made him more formidable.' 'Drake was a man of exceptional strength and resilience,' Jeffreys said. 'Why, he haunted my very nightmares when I was a boy. My father told me tales of him as if he were a bogey-man. I know that you are no Drake. Why, you stood by and watched one of your own kind be murdered, under your window, at Trinity, by my lord Upnor, twenty-some years ago, and you did nothing – nothing! I remember it well, and I know that you do as well, Waterhouse.' 'Does this sham have a purpose, other than to reminisce about College days?' Daniel inquired. 'Give him a revolution, ' Jeffreys said. The fellow who had poured water into Daniel's mouth earlier – some sort of armed bailiff – stepped up, grabbed one of the four grappling-hooks projecting from Daniel's collar, and gave it a wrench. The whole apparatus spun round, using Daniel's neck as an axle, until he could get his arms up to stop it. A simpler man would have guessed – from the sheer amount of pain involved – that his head had been half sawed away. But Daniel had dissected enough necks to know where all the important bits were. He ran a few quick experiments and concluded that, as he could swallow, breathe, and wiggle his toes, none of the main cables had been severed. 'You are charged with perverting the English language,' Jeffreys proclaimed. 'To wit: that on numerous occasions during idle talk in coffee-houses, and in private correspondence, you have employed the word ‘revolution,' heretofore a perfectly innocent and useful English word, in an altogether new sense, conceived and propagated by you, meaning radical and violent overthrow of a government.' 'Oh, I don't think violence need have anything to do with it.' 'You admit you are guilty then!' 'I know how the genuine Star Chamber worked . . . I don't imagine this sham one is any different . . . why should I dignify it by pretending to put up a defense?' 'The defendant is guilty as charged!' Jeffreys announced, as if, by superhuman effort, he'd just brought an exhausting trial to a close. 'I shan't pretend to be surprised by the outcome – while you were asleep, we interrogated several witnesses – all agreed you have been using ‘revolution' in a sense that is not to be found in any treatise of Astronomy. We even asked your old chum from Trinity . . .' 'Monmouth? But didn't you chop his head off?' 'No, no, the other one. The Natural Philosopher who has been so impertinent as to quarrel with the King in the matter of Father Francis . . .' 'Newton!?' 'Yes, that one! I asked him, ‘You have written all of these fat books on the subject of Revolutions, what does the word signify to you?' He said it meant one body moving about another – he uttered not a word about politics.' 'I cannot believe you have brought Newton into this matter.' Jeffreys abruptly stopped playing the rôle of Grand Inquisitor, and answered in the polite, distracted voice of the busy man-about-town: 'Well, I had to grant him an audience anyway, on the Father Francis matter. He does not know you are here. . . . just as you, evidently, did not know he was in London.' In the same sort of tone, Daniel replied, 'Can't blame you for finding it all just a bit bewildering. Of course! You'd assume that Newton, on a visit to London, would renew his acquaintance with me, and other Fellows of the Royal Society.' 'I have it on good authority he has been spending time with that damned Swiss traitor instead.' 'Swiss traitor?' 'The one who warned William of Orange of the French dragoons.' 'Fatio?' 'Yes, Fatio de Duilliers.' Jeffreys was absent-mindedly patting his wig, puzzling over this fragment re Newton. The sudden change in the Lord Chancellor's affect had engendered, in Daniel, a giddiness that was probably dangerous. He had been trying to stifle it. But now Daniel's stomach began to shake with suppressed laughter. 'Jeffreys! Fatio is a Swiss Protestant who warned the Dutch of a French plot, on Dutch soil . . . and for this you call him a traitor?' 'He betrayed Monsieur le comte de Fenil. And now this traitor has moved to London, for he knows that his life is forfeit anywhere on the Continent . . . anywhere Persons of Quality observe a decent respect for justice. But here! London, England! Oh, in other times his presence would not have been tolerated. But in these parlous times, when such a man comes and takes up residence in our city, no one bats an eye . . . and when he is seen buying alchemical supplies, and talking in coffee-houses with our foremost Natural Philosopher, no one thinks of it as scandalous.' Daniel perceived that Jeffreys was beginning to work himself up into another frenzy. So before the Lord Chancellor completely lost his mind, Daniel reminded him: 'The real Star Chamber was known for pronouncing stern sentences, and executing them quickly.' 'True! And if this assembly had such powers, your nose would be lying in the gutter, and the rest of you would be on a ship to the West Indies, where you would chop sugar cane on my plantation for the rest of your life. As it stands, I cannot punish you until I've convicted you of something in the common-law court. Shouldn't be all that difficult, really.' 'How do you suppose?' 'Tilt the defendant back!' The Star Chamber's bailiffs, or executioners or whatever they were, converged on Daniel from behind, gripped the back of his chair, and yanked, raising its front legs up off the floor and leaving Daniel's feet a-dangle. His weight shifted from his buttocks to his back, and the iron collar went into motion and tried to fall to the floor. But it was stopped by Daniel's throat. He tried to raise his hands to take the weight of the iron off his wind-pipe, but Jeffreys' henchmen had anticipated that: each of them had a spare hand that he used to pin one of Daniel's hands down to the chair. Daniel could see nothing but stars now: stars painted on the ceiling when his eyes were open, and other stars that zoomed across his vision when his eyes were closed. The face of the Lord Chancellor now swam into the center of this firmament like the Man in the Moon. Now Jeffreys had been an astonishingly beautiful young man, even by the standards of the generation of young Cavaliers that had included such Adonises as the Duke of Monmouth and John Churchill. His eyes, in particular, had been of remarkable beauty – perhaps this accounted for his ability to seize and hold the young Daniel Waterhouse with his gaze. Unlike Churchill, he had not aged well. Years in London, serving as solicitor general to the Duke of York, then as a prosecutor of supposed conspirators, then Lord Chief Justice, and now Lord Chancellor, had put leaves of lard on him, as on a kidney in a butcher-stall. His eyebrows had grown out into great gnarled wings, or horns. The eyes were beautiful as ever, but instead of gazing out from the fair unblemished face of a youth, they peered out through a sort of embrasure, between folds of chub below and snarled brows above. It had probably been fifteen years since Jeffreys could list, from memory, all the men he had murdered through the judicial system; if he hadn't lost count while extirpating the Popish Plot, he certainly had during the Bloody Assizes. At any rate Daniel could not now tear his eyes away from those of Jeffreys. In a sense Jeffreys had planned this spectacle poorly. The drug must have been slipped into Daniel's drink at the coffeehouse and Jeffreys's minions must have abducted him after he'd fallen asleep in a water-taxi. But the elixir had made him so groggy that he had failed to be afraid until this moment. Now, Drake wouldn't have been afraid, even fully awake; he'd sat in this room and defied Archbishop Laud to his face, knowing what they would do to him. Daniel had been brave, until now, only insofar as the drug had made him stupid. But now, looking up into the eyes of Jeffreys, he recalled all of the horror-stories that had emanated from the Tower as this man's career had flourished: Dissidents who 'committed suicide' by cutting their own throats to the vertebrae; great trees in Taunton decorated with hanged men, dying slowly; the Duke of Monmouth having his head gradually hacked off by Jack Ketch, five or six strokes of the axe, as Jeffreys looked on with those eyes. The colors were draining out of the world. Something white and fluffy came into view near Jeffreys's face: a hand surrounded by a lace cuff. Jeffreys had grasped one of the hooks projecting up from Daniel's collar. 'You say that your revolution does not have to involve any violence,' he said. 'I say you must think harder about the nature of revolution. For as you can see, this hook is on top now. A different one is on the bottom. True, we can raise the low one up by a simple revolution – ' Jeffreys wrenched the collar around, its entire weight bearing on Daniel's adam's apple – giving Daniel every reason to scream. But he made no sound other than a pitiable attempt to suck in some air. 'Ah, but observe! The one that was high is now low ! Let us raise it up then, for it does not love to be low.' Jeffreys wrenched it back up. 'Alas, we are back to where we started; the high is high, the low is low, and what's the point of having a revolution at all?' Jeffreys now repeated the demonstration, laughing at Daniel's struggle for air. 'Who could ask for a better career!' he exclaimed. 'Slowly decapitating the men I went to college with! We made Monmouth last as long as 'twas possible, but the axe is imprecise, Jack Ketch is a butcher, and it ended all too soon. But this collar is an excellent device for a gradual sawing-off, I could make him last for days !' Jeffreys sighed with delight. Daniel could not see any more, other than a few pale violet blotches swimming in turbulent gray. But Jeffreys must have signalled the bailiffs to right the chair, for suddenly the weight of the collar was on his collarbones and his efforts to breathe were working. 'I trust I have disabused you of any ludicrous ideas concerning the true nature of revolutions. If the low are to be made high, Daniel, then the high must be made low – but the high like to be high – and they have an army and a navy. ‘Twill never occur without violence. And ‘twill fail given enough time, as your father's failed. Have you quite learnt the lesson? Or shall I repeat the demonstration?' Daniel tried to say something: namely to beg that the demonstration not be repeated. He had to because it hurt too much and might kill him. To beg for mercy was utterly reasonable – and the act of a coward. The only thing that prevented him from doing it was that his voice-box was not working. 'It is customary for a judge to give a bit of a scolding to a guilty man, to help him mend his ways,' Jeffreys reflected. 'That part of the proceedings is now finished – we move on to Sentencing. Concerning this, I have Bad News, and Good News. 'Tis an ancient custom to give the recipient of Bad and Good News, the choice of which to hear first. But as Good News for me is Bad for you, and vice versa, allowing you to make the choice will only lead to confusion. So: the Bad News, for me, is that you are correct, the Star Chamber has not been formally re-constituted. 'Tis just a pastime for a few of us Senior Jurists and has no legal authority to carry out sentences. The Good News, for me, is that I can pronounce a most severe sentence upon you even without legal authority: I sentence you, Daniel Waterhouse, to be Daniel Waterhouse for the remainder of your days, and to live, for that time, every day with the knowledge of your own disgusting cravenness. Go! You disgrace this Chamber! Your father was a vile man who deserved what he got here. But you are a disfigurement of his memory! Yes, that's right, on your feet, about face, march! Get out! Just because you must live with yourself does not mean we must be subjected to the same degradation! Out, out! Bailiffs, throw this quivering mound of shite out into the gutter, and pray that the piss running down his legs will wash him down into the Thames!' THEY DUMPED HIM like a corpse in the open fields upriver from Westminster, between the Abbey and the town of Chelsea. When they rolled him out the back of the cart, he came very close to losing his head, as one of the collar-hooks caught in a slat on the wagon's edge and gave him a jerk at the neck so mighty it was like to rip his soul out of his living body. But the wood gave way before his bones did, and he fell down into the dirt, or at least that was what he inferred from evidence near to hand when he came to his senses. His desire at this point was to lie full-length on the ground and weep until he died of dehydration. But the collar did not permit lying down. Having it round his neck was a bit like having Drake stand over him and berate him for not getting up. So up he got, and stumbled round and wept for a while. He reckoned he must be in Hogs-den, or Pimlico as men in the real estate trade liked to name it: not the country and not the city, but a blend of the most vile features of both. Stray dogs chased feral chickens across a landscape that had been churned up by rooting swine and scraped bald by scavenging goats. Nocturnal fires of bakeries and breweries shot rays of ghastly red light through gaps in their jumble-built walls, spearing whores and drunks in their gleam. It could have been worse: they could have dumped him in a place with vegetation. The collar was designed to prevent slaves from running away by turning every twig, reed, vine, and stalk into a constable that would grab the escapee by the nape as he ran by. As Daniel roamed about, he explored the hasp with his fingers and found it had been wedged shut with a carven peg of soft wood which had been hammered through the loops. By worrying this back and forth he was able to draw it out. Then the collar came loose on his neck and he got it off easily. He had a dramatical impulse to carry it over to the river-bank and fling it into the Thames, but then coming to his senses he recollected that there was a mile of dodgy ground to be traversed before he reached the edge of Westminster, and any number of dogs and Vagabonds who might need to be beaten back in that interval. So he kept a grip on it, swinging it back and forth in the darkness occasionally, to make himself feel better. But no assailant came for him. His foes were not of the sort that could be struck down with a rod of iron. ON THE SOUTHERN EDGE of the settled and civilized part of Westminster, a soon-to-be-fashionable street was under construction. It was the latest project of Sterling Waterhouse, who was now Earl of Willesden, and spent most of his days on his modest country estate just to the northwest of London, trying to elevate the self-esteem of his investors. One of the people who'd put money into this Westminster street was the woman Eliza, who was now Countess of Zeur. Eliza occupied something like fifty percent of all Daniel's waking thoughts now. Obviously this was a disproportionate figure. If it'd been the case that Daniel continually come up with new and original thoughts on the subject of Eliza, then he might have been able to justify thinking about her ten or even twenty percent of the time. But all he did was think the same things over and over again. During the hour or so he'd spent in the Star Chamber, he'd scarcely thought of her at all, and so now he had to make up for that by thinking about nothing else for an hour or so. Eliza had come to London in February, and on the strength of personal recommendations from Leibniz and Huygens, she had talked her way into a Royal Society meeting – one of the few women ever to attend one, unless you counted Freaks of Nature brought in to display their multiple vaginas or nurse their two-headed babies. Daniel had escorted the Countess of Zeur into Gresham's College a bit nervously, fearing that she'd make a spectacle of herself, or that the Fellows would get the wrong idea and use her as a subject for vivisection. But she had dressed and behaved modestly and all had gone well. Later Daniel had taken her out to Willesden to meet Sterling, with whom she gotten along famously. Daniel had known they would; six months earlier both had been commoners, and now they strolled in what was to become Sterling's French garden, deciding where the urns and statues ought to go, and compared notes as to which shops were the best places to buy old family heirlooms. At any rate, both of them now had money invested in this attempt to bring civilization to Hogs-den. Even Daniel had put a few pounds into it (not that he considered himself much of an investor; but British coinage had only gotten worse in the last twenty years, if that was imaginable, and there was no point in keeping your money that way). To prevent the site from being ravaged every night by the former inhabitants (human and non-), a porter was stationed there, in a makeshift lodge, with a large number of more or less demented dogs. Daniel managed to wake all of them up by stumbling over the fence at 3:00 a.m. with his neck half sawn through. Of course the porter woke up last, and didn't call the dogs off until half of Daniel's remaining clothes had been torn away. But by that point in the evening, those clothes could not be accounted any great loss. Daniel was happy just to be recognized by someone, and made up the customary story about having been set upon by blackguards. To this, the porter responded with the obligatory wink. He gave Daniel ale, an act of pure kindness that brought fresh tears to Daniel's eyes, and sent his boy a-running into Westminster to summon a hackney-chair. This was a sort of vertical coffin suspended on a couple of staves whose ends were held up by great big taciturn men. Daniel climbed into it and fell asleep. When he woke up it was dawn, and he was in front of Gresham's College, on the other end of London. A letter was waiting for him from France. The letter began, Is the weather in London still quite dismal? From the vantage point of Versailles, I can assure you that spring approaches London. Soon, I will be approaching, too. Daniel (who was reading this in the College's entrance hall) stopped there, stuffed the letter into his belt, and stumbled into the penetralia of the Pile. Not even Sir Thomas Gresham his own self would be able to find his way around the place now, if he should come back to haunt it. The R.S. had been having its way with the building for almost three decades and it was just about spent. Daniel scoffed at all talk of building a new Wren-designed structure and moving the Society into it. The Royal Society was not reducible to an inventory of strange objects, and could not be re-located by transporting that inventory to a new building, any more than a man could travel to France by having his internal organs cut out and packed in barrels and shipped across the Channel. As a geometric proof contained, in its terms and its references, the whole history of geometry, so the piles of stuff in the larger Pile that was Gresham's College encoded the development of Natural Philosophy from the first meetings of Boyle, Wren, Hooke, and Wilkins up until to-day. Their arrangement, the order of stratifications, reflected what was going on in the minds of the Fellows (predominantly Hooke) in any given epoch, and to move it, or to tidy it up, would have been akin to burning a library. Anyone who could not find what he needed there, didn't deserve to be let in. Daniel felt about the place as a Frenchman felt about the French language, which was to say that it all made perfect sense once you understood it, and if you didn't understand it, then to hell with you. He found a copy of the I Ching in about a minute, in the dark, and carrying it over to where rosy-fingered Dawn was clawing desperately at a grime-caked window, found the hexagram 19, Lin, Approach. The book went on at length concerning the bottomless significance of this symbol, but the only meaning that mattered to Daniel was 000011, which was how the pattern of broken and unbroken lines translated to binary notation. In decimal notation this was 3. It would have been perfectly all right for Daniel to have crawled up to his garret atop the College and fallen asleep, but he felt that having been stupefied with opium for a night and a day ought to have enabled him to catch up on his sleep, and events in the Star Chamber and later in Hogs-den had got him rather keyed up. Any one of these three things sufficed to prevent sleep: the raw wounds around his neck, the commotion of the City coming awake, and his beastly, uncontrollable lust for Eliza. He went up-stairs to a room that was optimistically called the Library, not because it had books (every room did) but because it had windows. Here he spread out Eliza's letter on a table all streaked and splotched with disturbing stains. Next to it he set down a rectangle of scrap paper (actually a proof of a woodcut intended for Volume III of Newton's Principia Mathematica ). Examining the characters in Eliza's letter one by one, he assigned each to either the 0 alphabet or the 1 alphabet and wrote a corresponding digit on the scrap paper, arranging them in groups of five. Thus The first group of binary digits made the number 12, the second 4, the next 16, and the one after that 6. So writing these out on a new line, and subtracting a 3 from each, he got Which made the letters I A M C The light got better as he worked. Leibniz was building a splendid library in Wolfenbüttel, with a high rotunda that would shed light down onto the table below . . . His forehead was on the table. Not a good way to work. Not a good way to sleep either, unless your neck was so torn up as to make lying down impossible, in which case it was the only way to sleep. And Daniel had been sleeping. The pages under his face were a sea of awful light, the unfair light of noon. 'Truly you are an inspiration to all Natural Philosophers, Daniel Waterhouse.' Daniel sat up. He was stiff as a grotesque. He could feel and hear the scab-work on his neck cracking. Seated two tables away, quill in hand, was Nicolas Fatio de Duilliers. 'Sir!' Fatio held up a hand. 'I do not mean to disturb you, there is no need for – ' 'Ah, but there is a need for me to express my gratitude. I have not seen you since you saved the life of the Prince of Orange.' Fatio closed his eyes for a moment. “'Twas like a conjunction of planets, purely fortuitous, reflecting no distinction on me, and let us say no more of it.' 'I learned only recently that you were in town – that your life was in danger so long as you remained on the Continent. Had I known as much earlier, I'd have offered you whatever hospitality I could – ' 'And if I were worthy of the title of gentleman, I'd have waited for that offer before making myself at home here,' Fatio returned. 'Isaac of course has given you the run of the place and that is splendid.' Daniel now noticed Fatio gazing at him with a penetrating, analytical look that reminded him of Hooke peering through a lens. From Hooke it was not objectionable, somehow. From Fatio it was mildly offensive. Of course Fatio was wondering how Daniel knew that he'd been hobnobbing with Isaac. Daniel could have told him the story about Jeffreys and the Star Chamber, but it would only have confused matters more. Fatio now appeared to notice, for the first time, the damage to Daniel's neck. His eyes saw all, but they were so big and luminous that it was impossible for him to conceal what he was gazing at; unlike the eyes of Jeffreys, which could secretly peer this way and that in the shadow of their deep embrasures, Fatio's eyes could never be used discreetly. 'Don't ask,' Daniel said. 'You, sir, suffered an honorable wound on the beach. I've suffered one, not so honorable, but in the same cause, in London.' 'Are you quite all right, Doctor Waterhouse?' 'Splendid of you to inquire. I am fine. A cup of coffee and I'll be as good as new.' Whereupon Daniel snatched up his papers and repaired to the coffee-house, which was full of people and yet where he felt more privacy than under the eyes of Fatio. The binary digits hidden in the subtleties of Eliza's handwriting became, in decimal notation, 4 16 6 18 16 12 17 10 which when he subtracted 3 from each (that being the key hidden in the I Ching reference) became 9 1 13 3 15 13 9 14 7 . . . which said, I AM COMING . . . THE FULL DECIPHERMENT took a while, because Eliza provided details concerning her travel plans, and wrote of all she wanted to do while she was in London. When he was finished writing out the message he came alive to the fact that he had sat for a long time, and consumed much coffee, and needed to urinate in the worst way. He could not recall the last time he had made water. And so he went back to a sort of piss-hole in the corner of the tiny court in back of the coffeehouse. Nothing happened, and so after about half a minute he bent forward as if bowing, and braced his forehead against the stone wall. He had learned that this helped to relax some of the muscles in his lower abdomen and make the urine come out more freely. That stratagem, combined with some artful shifting of the hips and deep breathing, elicited a few spurts of rust-colored urine. When it ceased to work, he turned round, pulled his garments up around his waist, and squatted to piss in the Arab style. By shifting his center of gravity just so, he was able to start up a kind of gradual warm seepage that would provide relief if he kept it up for a while. This gave him lots of time to think of Eliza, if spinning phant'sies could be named thinking. It was plain from her letter that she expected to visit Whitehall Palace. Which signified little, since any person who was wearing clothes and not carrying a lighted granadoe could go in and wander about the place. But since Eliza was a Countess who dwelt at Versailles, and Daniel (in spite of Jeffreys) a sort of courtier, when she said she wanted to visit Whitehall it meant that she expected to stroll and sup with Persons of Quality. Which could easily be arranged, since the Catholic Francophiles who made up most of the King's court would fall all over themselves making way for Eliza, if only to get a look at the spring fashions. But to arrange it would require planning – again, if the dreaming of fatuous dreams could be named planning. Like an astronomer plotting his tide-tables, Daniel had to project the slow wheeling of the seasons, the liturgical calendar, the sessions of Parliament and the progress of various important people's engagements, terminal diseases, and pregnancies into the time of the year when Eliza was expected to show up. His first thought had been that Eliza would be here at just the right time: for in another fortnight the King was going to issue a new Declaration of Indulgence that would make Daniel a hero, at least among Nonconformists. But as he squatted there he began to count off the weeks, tick, tick, tick, like the drops of urine detaching themselves one by one from the tip of his yard, and came aware that it would be much longer before Eliza actually got here – she'd be arriving no sooner than mid-May. By that time, the High Church priests would have had several Sundays to denounce Indulgence from their pulpits; they'd say it wasn't an act of Christian toleration at all, but a stalking-horse for Popery, and Daniel Waterhouse a dupe at best and a traitor at worst. Daniel might have to go live at Whitehall around then, just to be safe. It was while imagining that – living like a hostage in a dingy chamber at Whitehall, protected by John Churchill's Guards – that Daniel recalled another datum from his mental ephemeris, one that stopped up his pissing altogether. The Queen was pregnant. To date she'd produced no children at all. The pregnancy seemed to have come on more suddenly than human pregnancies customarily did. Perhaps they'd been slow to announce it because they'd expected it would only end in yet another miscarriage. But it seemed to have taken, and the size of her abdomen was now a matter of high controversy around Whitehall. She was expected to deliver in late May or early June – just the same time that Eliza would be visiting. Eliza was using Daniel to get inside the Palace so that she, Eliza, could know as early as possible whether King James II had a legitimate heir, and adjust her investments accordingly. This should have been as obvious as that Daniel had a big stone in his bladder, but somehow Daniel managed to finish what he was doing and go back into the coffee-house without becoming aware of either. The only person who seemed to understand matters was Robert Hooke, who was in the same coffee-house. He was talking, as usual, to Sir Christopher Wren. But he had been observing Daniel, this whole time, through an open window. He had the look on his face of a man who was determined to speak plainly of unpleasant facts, and Daniel managed to avoid him. Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) Versailles JULY 1688 To d'Avaux Monsieur, As you requested, I have changed over to the new cypher. To me it seems preposterous to imagine that the Dutch had broken the old one and read all of your letters! But, as always, you are the soul of discretion, and I will follow whatever precautions you demand of me. It was good that you wrote me that lovely, if vaguely sarcastic, letter of congratulations on the occasion of my being accorded my rightful hereditary title (since we are now of equal rank – whatever doubts you may harbor as to the legitimacy of my title – I hope you are not offended that I address you as Monsieur instead of Monseigneur now). Until your letter arrived, I had not heard from you in many months. At first, I assumed that the Prince of Orange's vulgar over-reaction to the so-called abduction attempt had left you isolated in the Hague, and unable to send letters out. As months went by, I began to worry that your affection for your most humble and obedient servant had cooled. Now I can see that this was all just idle phant'sy – the sort of aimless fretting to which my sex is so prone. You and I are as close as ever. So I will try to write a good letter and entice you to write me back. Business first: I have not tallied the numbers for the second quarter of 1688, and so please keep what follows in confidence from the other investors, but I am confident that we have made out better than anyone suspects. True, V.O.C. stock has been performing miserably, and yet the market has been too volatile to make a winning proposition out of selling it short or playing derivatives. Yet a few things – all in London, strangely enough – have saved our investments from disaster. One is traffic in commodities, particularly silver. England's coinage is becoming more debased every day, counterfeiters are a plague on the land, and, not to bore you with details, this entails flows of gold and silver in and out of that island from which we can profit if we make the right bets. You may wonder how I can possibly know which bets to make, living as I do in Versailles. Let me ease your concerns by explaining to you that I have made two visits to London since I last saw you, one in February and one in May, around the time that the son of King James II was born. The second visit was mandatory, of course, for everyone knew that the Queen of England was pregnant, and that the future of Britain and of Europe hinged upon her producing a legitimate male heir. The markets in Amsterdam were bound to react strongly to any news from Whitehall and so I had to be there. I have seduced an Englishman who is close to the King – so close that he was able to get me into Whitehall during the time that the Queen went into labor. Since this is a business report, Monsieur, I'll say no more here; but allow me to mention that there are certain peculiarities surrounding the delivery of this infant with which I'll entertain you some other time. The Englishman is a figure of some note in the Royal Society. He has an older half-brother who makes money in more ways than I can enumerate. The family has old connections to the goldsmith's shops that used to be situated around Cornhill and Threadneedle, and newer connections to the banca that was set up by Sir Richard Apthorp after Charles II put many of the goldsmiths out of business. If you are not familiar with a banca, it means something akin to a goldsmith, except that they have dropped any pretense of goldsmithing per se; they are financiers dealing in metal and paper. Odd as it might sound, this type of business actually makes sense, at least in the context of London, and Apthorp is doing well by it. It was through this connexion that I became aware of the trends in silver and gold mentioned earlier, and was able to make the right bets, as it were. Lacking the refinement of the French, the English have no equivalent of Versailles, so the high and mighty, the adherents of diverse religions, commerçants, and Vagabonds are all commingled in London. You've spent time in Amsterdam, which may give you some idea of what London is like, except that London is not nearly as well organized. Much of the mixing takes place in coffee-houses. Surrounding the ‘Change are diverse coffee- and chocolate-houses that, over time, have come to serve specific clientele. Birds of a feather flock together and so those who trade in East India Company stocks go to one place and so forth. Now as the overseas trade of England has waxed, the business of under-writing ships and other risky ventures has become a trade of some significance in and of itself. Those who are in the market for insurance have recently begun going to Lloyd's Coffeehouse, which has, for whatever reason, become the favorite haunt of the underwriters. This arrangement works well for buyer and seller alike: the buyer can solicit bids from diverse underwriters simply by strolling from table to table, the sellers can distribute the risks by spontaneously forming associations. I hope I am not boring you to death, Monsieur, but it is a fascinating thing to watch, and you yourself have now made a bit of money from this quarter, which you can use to buy yourself a picaroon-romance if my discourse is too tedious. Tout le monde at Versailles agree that L'Emmerdeur in Barbary is a good read, and I have it on high authority that a copy was spied in the King's bedchamber. Enough of business; now, gossip. Madame deigns to recognize me now that I am known to be a Countess. For the longest time, she regarded me as a parasite, a strangling vine, and so I expected she would be the last person at Court to accept me as a noblewoman. But she astonished me with a welcome that was courteous and almost warm, and begrudged me a few moments' polite conversation, when I encountered her in the gardens the other day. I believe her previous coldness toward me came from two reasons. One is that like all the other foreign royals, la Palatine (as Liselotte is sometimes referred to here) is insecure about her rank, and tends to exalt herself by belittling those whose bloodlines are even more questionable than hers. This is not an attractive feature but it is all too human! The second reason is that her chief rival at Court is de Maintenon, who came up from a wretched state to become the unofficial Queen of France. And so whenever Madame sees a woman at Court who has aspirations, it reminds her of the one she hates. Many nobles of ancient families sneer at me because I handle money. Liselotte is not, however, one of these. On the contrary, I believe it explains why she has accepted me. Now that I have spent two years in the household of Mme. la duchesse d'Oyonnax, surrounded by the very type of ambitious young woman Madame despises so much, I can understand why she takes such care to avoid them. Those girls have very few assets: their names, their bodies, and (if they are lucky enough to have been born with any) their wits. The first of these – their names, and the pedigrees attached – suffice to get them in the gates. They are like an invitation to the ball. But most of those families have more liabilities than assets. Once one of those girls has found a position in some household at Versailles, she has only a few years to make arrangements for the remainder of her life. She is like a plucked rose in a vase. Every day at dawn she looks out the window to see a gardener driving a wagon loaded with wilted flowers that are taken out to the countryside to be used for mulch, and the similitude to her own future is clear. In a few years she will be outshined, at all the parties, by younger girls. Her brothers will inherit any assets the family might have. If she can marry well, as Sophie did, she may have a life to look forward to; if not, she will be shipped off to some convent, as two of Sophie's beautiful and brilliant sisters were. When that desperation is combined with the heedless irresponsible nature of young persons generally, cruelty becomes mundane. It's only reasonable for Madame to want to avoid young women of that type. She has always assumed that I was one of them – having no way to distinguish me from the others. But lately, as I mentioned, she has become aware that I handle investments. This sets me apart – it tells her that I have interests and assets outside of the intrigues of Court and so am not as dangerous as the others. In effect, she is treating me as if I had just married a rich handsome Duke, and gotten all my affairs in order. Instead of a cut rose in a vase, I am a rose-bush with living roots in rich soil. Or perhaps I'm reading too much into a brief conversation! She asked me if the hunting was good on Qwghlm. Knowing how much she loves to hunt, I told her it was miserable, unless throwing stones at rats qualified – and how, pray tell, was the hunting here at Versailles? Of course I meant the vast game parks that the King has constructed around the château, but Liselotte shot back, 'Indoors or out?' 'I have seen game taken indoors,' I allowed, 'but only through trapping or poisoning, which are common peasant vices.' 'Qwghlmians are more accustomed to the outdoor life?' 'If only because our dwellings keep getting blown down, madame.' 'Can you ride, mademoiselle?' she asked. 'After a fashion – for I learned bareback style,' I answered. 'There are no saddles where you come from?' 'In olden days there were, for we would suspend them from tree-branches overnight, to prevent them from being eaten by small creatures in the night-time. But then the English cut down the trees, and so now it is our custom to ride bareback.' 'I should like to see that,' she returned, 'but it is hardly proper.' 'We are guests in the King's house and must abide by his standards of propriety,' I said dutifully. 'If you can ride well in a saddle here, I shall invite you to St. Cloud – that is my estate, and you may abide by my rules there.' 'Do you think Monsieur would object?' 'My husband objects to everything I do,' she said, 'and so he objects to nothing. ' In my next letter, I'll let you know whether I passed the riding-test, and got the invitation to St. Cloud. And I will send the quarterly figures as well! Eliza de la Zeur Tower of London SUMMER AND AUTUMN 1688 Therefore it happeneth commonly, that such as value themselves by the greatness of their wealth, adventure on crimes, upon hope of escaping punishment, by corrupting public justice, or obtaining pardon by money, or other rewards. – Hobbes, Leviathan NOW AS ENGLAND WAS A country of fixed ways, they imprisoned him in the same chamber where they had put Oldenburg twenty years before. But some things changed even in England; James II was peevish and fitful where his older brother had been merry, and so Daniel was kept closer than Oldenburg had been, and allowed to leave the chamber to stroll upon the walls only rarely. He spent all his time in that round room, encircled by the eldritch glyphs that had been scratched into the stone by condemned alchemists and sorcerers of yore, and pathetic Latin plaints graven by Papists under Elizabeth. Twenty years ago he and Oldenburg had made idle jests about carving new graffiti in the Universal Character of John Wilkins. The words he had exchanged with Oldenburg still seemed to echo around the room, as if the stone were a telescope mirror that forever recurved all information towards the center. The idea of the Universal Character now seemed queer and naïve to Daniel, and so it didn't enter his mind to begin scratching at the stone for the first fortnight or so of his imprisonment. He reckoned that it would take a long time to make any lasting mark, and he assumed he would not live long enough. Jeffreys could only have put him in here to kill him, and when Jeffreys set his mind to killing someone there was no stopping him, he did it the way a farmer's wife plucked a chicken. But no specific judicial proceedings were underway – a sign that this was not to be a judicial murder (meaning a stately and more or less predictable one), but the other kind. It was marvelously quiet at the Tower of London, the Mint being shut down at the moment, and people never came to visit him, and this was good – rarely was a murder victim afforded such an opportunity to get his spiritual house in order. Puritans did not go to confession or have a special sacrament before dying, as Papists did, but even so, Daniel supposed there must be a bit of tidying-up he could do, in the dusty corners of his soul, before the men with the daggers came. So he spent a while searching his soul, and found nothing there. It was as sparse and void as a sacked cathedral. He did not have a wife or children. He lusted after Eliza, Countess de la Zeur, but something about being locked up in this round room made him realize that she neither lusted after nor particularly liked him. He did not have a career to speak of, because he was a contemporary of Hooke, Newton, and Leibniz, and therefore predestined for rôles such as scribe, amanuensis, sounding-board, errand-boy. His thorough training for the Apocalypse had proved a waste, and he had gamely tried to redirect his skills and his energies towards the shaping of a secular Apocalypse, which he styled Revolution. But prospects for such a thing looked unfavorable at the moment. Scratching something on the wall might enable him to make a permanent mark on the world, but he would not have time. All in all, his epitaph would be: daniel waterhouse 1646–1688 son of drake. It might have made an ordinary man just a bit melancholy, this, but something about its very bleakness appealed to the spirit of a Puritan and the mind of a Natural Philosopher. Suppose he'd had twelve children, written a hundred books, and taken towns and cities from the Turks, and had statues of himself all over, and then been clapped in the Tower to have his throat cut? Would matters then stand differently? Or would these be meaningless distractions, a clutter of vanity, empty glamour, false consolation? Souls were created somehow, and placed in bodies, which lived for more or fewer years, and after that all was faith and speculation. Perhaps after death was nothing. But if there was something, then Daniel couldn't believe it had anything to do with the earthly things that the body had done – the children it had spawned, the gold it had hoarded – except insofar as those things altered one's soul, one's state of consciousness. Thus he convinced himself that having lived a bleak spare life had left his soul no worse off than anyone else's. Having children, for example, might have changed him, but only by providing insights that would have made it easier, or more likely, to have accomplished some internal change, some transfiguration of the spirit. Whatever growth or change occurred in one's soul had to be internal, like the metamorphoses that went on inside of cocoons, seeds, and eggs. External conditions might help or hinder those changes, but could not be strictly necessary. Otherwise it simply was not fair, did not make sense. Because in the end every soul, be it never so engaged in the world, was like Daniel Waterhouse, alone in a round room in a stone tower, and receiving impressions from the world through a few narrow embrasures. Or so he told himself; either he would be murdered soon, and learn whether he was right or wrong, or be spared and left to wonder about it. On the twentieth day of his imprisonment, which Daniel reckoned to be August 17th, 1688, the perceptions coming in through his embrasures were of furious argument and wholesale change. The soldiers he'd been glimpsing out in the yard were gone, replaced by others, in different uniforms. They looked like the King's Own Black Torrent Guards, but that couldn't be, for they were a household regiment, stationed at Whitehall Palace, and Daniel couldn't imagine why they would be uprooted from their quarters there and moved miles down-river to the Tower of London. Unfamiliar men came to empty his chamber-pot and bring him food – better food than he'd become accustomed to. Daniel asked them questions. Speaking in Dorsetshire accents, they said that they were indeed the King's Own Black Torrent Guards, and that the food they were bringing him had been piling up for quite some time in a porter's lodge. Daniel's friends had been bringing it. But the men who'd been running the Tower until yesterday – a distinctly inferior foot regiment – had not been delivering it. Daniel then moved on to questions of a more challenging nature and the men stopped supplying answers, even after he shared a few oysters with them. When he became insistent, they allowed as how they would relay his questions to their sergeant, who (as they warned him) was very busy just now, taking an inventory of the prisoners and of the Tower's defenses. It was two days before the sergeant came to call on Daniel. They were trying days. For just when Daniel had convinced himself that his soul was a disembodied consciousness in a stone tower, perceiving the world through narrow slits, he had been given oysters. They were of the best: Roger Comstock had sent them. They made his body happy when he ate them, and affected his soul much more than seemed proper, for a disembodied consciousness. Either his theory was wrong, or the seductions of the world were more powerful than he'd remembered. When Tess had got the smallpox she'd got it bad, and the pustules had all joined together and her whole skin had fallen off, and her guts had shot out of her anus into a bloody pile on the bed. After that she had somehow remained alive for a full ten and a half hours. Considering the carnal pleasures she had brought him during the years she'd been his mistress, Daniel had taken this the same way Drake would've: as a cautionary parable about fleshly delights. Better to perceive the world as Tess had during those ten and a half hours than as Daniel had while he'd been fucking her. But the oysters were extraordinarily good, their flavor intense and vaguely dangerous, their consistency clearly sexual. Daniel shared some with the sergeant, who agreed that they were extraordinary but had little else to say – most of Daniel's questions caused him to go shifty-eyed, and some even made him cringe. Finally he agreed to take the matter up with his sergeant, giving Daniel a nightmare vision of some endless regression of sergeants, each more senior and harder to reach than the last. Robert Hooke showed up with a firkin of ale. Daniel assaulted it in much the same way as the murderers would him. 'I was apprehensive that you would spurn my gift, and pour it into the Thames,' Hooke said irritably, 'but I see that the privations of the Tower have turned you into a veritable satyr. ' 'I am developing a new theory of bodily perceptions, and their intercourse with the soul, and this is research, ' said Daniel, quaffing vigorously. He huffed ale-foam out of his whiskers (he'd not shaved in weeks) and tried to adopt a searching look. 'Being condemned to die is a mighty stimulus to philosophick ratiocination, all of which is however wasted at the instant the sentence is carried out – fortunately I've been spared – ' 'So that you may pass on your insights to me, ' Hooke finished dourly. Then, with ponderous tact: 'My memory has become faulty, pray just write it all down.' 'They won't allow me pen and paper.' 'Have you asked again recently? They would not allow me, or anyone, to visit you until today. But with the new regiment, a new regimen.' 'I've been scratching on yonder wall instead,' Daniel announced, waving at the beginnings of a geometric diagram. Hooke's gray eyes regarded it bleakly. 'I spied it when I came in,' he confessed, 'and supposed 'twas something very ancient and time-worn. Very recent and in progress would never have crossed my mind.' Daniel was flummoxed for a few moments – just long enough for his pulse to rouse, his face to flush, and his vocal cords to constrict. 'It is difficult not to take that as a rebuke, ' he said. 'I am merely trying to see if I can reconstruct one of Newton's proofs from memory.' Hooke looked away. The sun had gone down a few minutes ago. A westerly embrasure reflected in his eyes as an identical pair of vertical red slits. 'It is a perfectly defensible practice,' he admitted. 'If I'd spent more of my youth learning geometers' tricks and less of it looking at things, and learning how to see, perhaps I'd have written the Principia instead of him.' This was an appalling thing to say. Envy was common as pipe-smoke at Royal Society meetings, but to voice it so baldly was rare. But then Hooke had never cared, or even noticed, what people thought of him. It took a few moments for Daniel to collect himself, and to give Hooke's utterance the ceremonial silence it demanded. Then he said, 'Leibniz has much to say on the subject of perceptions which I have but little understood until recently. And you may love Leibniz or not. But consider: Newton has thought things that no man before has ever thought. A great accomplishment, to be sure. Perhaps the greatest achievement any human mind has ever made. Very well – what does that say of Newton, and of us? Why, that his mind is framed in such a way that it can out-think anyone else's. So, all hail Isaac Newton! Let us give him his due, and glorify and worship whatever generative force can frame such a mind. Now, consider Hooke. Hooke has perceived things that no man before has ever perceived. What does that say of Hooke, and of us? That Hooke was framed in some special way? No, for just look at you, Robert – by your leave, you are stooped, asthmatic, fitful, beset by aches and ills, your eyes and ears are no better than those of men who've not perceived a thousandth part of what you have. Newton makes his discoveries in geometrickal realms where our minds cannot go, he strolls in a walled garden filled with wonders, to which he has the only key. But you, Hooke, are cheek-by-jowl with all of humanity in the streets of London. Anyone can look at the things you have looked at. But in those things you see what no one else has. You are the millionth human to look at a spark, a flea, a raindrop, the moon, and the first to see it. For anyone to say that this is less remarkable than what Newton has done, is to understand things in but a hollow and jejune way, 'Tis like going to a Shakespeare play and remembering only the sword-fights.' Hooke was silent for a time. The room had gone darker, and he'd faded to a gray ghost, that vivid pair of red sparks still marking his eyes. After a while, he sighed, and the sparks winked out for a few moments. 'I shall have to fetch you quill and paper, if this is to be the nature of your discourse, sir,' he said finally. 'I am certain that in the fullness of time, the opinion I have just voiced will be wide spread among learned persons,' Daniel said. 'This may not however elevate your stature during the years you have remaining; for fame's a weed, but repute is a slow-growing oak, and all we can do during our lifetimes is hop around like squirrels and plant acorns. There is no reason why I should conceal my opinions. But I warn you that I may express them all I like without bringing you fame or fortune.' 'It is enough you've expressed them to me in the aweful privacy of this chamber, sir,' Hooke returned. 'I declare that I am indebted to you, and will repay that debt one day, by giving you something of incalculable value when you least expect it. A pearl of great price.' LOOKING AT THE MASTER SERGEANT made Daniel feel old. From the way that lower ranks had alluded to this man, Daniel had expected some sort of graybearded multiple amputee. But under the scars and weathering was a man probably no more than thirty years of age. He entered Daniel's chamber without knocking or introducing himself, and inspected it as if he owned the place, taking particular care to learn the field of fire commanded by each of its embrasures. Moving sideways past each of those slits, he seemed to envision a fan-shaped territory of dead enemies spread across the ground beyond. 'Are you expecting to fight a war, sergeant?' said Daniel, who'd been scratching at some paper with a quill and casting only furtive dart-like glances at the sergeant. 'Are you expecting to start one?' the sergeant answered a minute later, as if in no especial hurry to respond. 'Why do you ask me such an odd question?' 'I am trying to conjure up some understanding of how a Puritan gets himself clapped in Tower just now, at a time when the only friends the King has are Puritans.' 'You have forgotten the Catholics.' 'No, sir, the King has forgotten 'em. Much has changed since you were locked up. First he locked up the Anglican bishops for refusing to preach toleration of Catholics and Dissenters.' 'I know that much – I was a free man at the time,' Daniel said. 'But the whole country was like to rise up in rebellion, Catholic churches were being put to the torch just for sport, and so he let 'em go, just to quiet things down.' 'But that is very different from forgetting the Catholics, sergeant.' 'Ah but since – since you've been immured here – why, the King has begun to fall apart.' 'So far I've learned nothing remarkable, sergeant, other than that there is a sergeant in the King's service who actually knows how to use the word ‘immured.' “ 'You see, no one believes his son is really his son – that's what has him resting so uneasy.' 'What on earth do you mean?' 'Why, the story's gotten out that the Queen was never pregnant at all – just parading around with pillows stuffed under her dress – and that the so-called Prince is just a common babe snatched from an orphanage somewhere, and smuggled into the birth-chamber inside a warming-pan.' Daniel contemplated this, dumbfounded. 'I saw the baby emerge from the Queen's vagina with my own eyes,' he said. 'Hold on to that memory, Professor, for it may keep you alive. No one in England thinks the child is anything but a base smuggled-in changeling. And so the King is retreating on every front now. Consequently the Anglicans no longer fear him, while the Papists cry that he has abandoned the only true faith.' Daniel pondered. 'The King wanted Cambridge to grant a degree to a Benedictine monk named Father Francis, who was viewed, around Cambridge, as a sort of stalking-horse for the Pope of Rome,' he said. 'Any news of him?' 'The King tried to insinuate Jesuits and such-like everywhere, ' said the sergeant, 'but has withdrawn a good many of 'em in the last fortnight. I'd wager Cambridge can stand down, for the King's power is ebbing – ebbing halfway to France.' Daniel now went silent for a while. Finally the sergeant resumed speaking, in a lower, more sociable tone: 'I am not learned, but I've been to many plays, which is where I picked up words like ‘immured,' and it oftimes happens – especially in your newer plays – that a player will forget his next line, and you'll hear a spear-carrier or lutenist muttering ‘im a prompt. And in that spirit, I'll now supply you with your next line, sir: something like ‘My word, these are disastrous tidings, my King, a true friend to all Nonconformists, is in trouble, what shall become of us, how can I be of service to his Majesty?'' Daniel said nothing. The sergeant seemed to have become provoked, and could not now contain himself from prowling and pacing around the room, as if Daniel were a specimen about whom more could be learned by peering at it from diverse angles. 'On the other hand, perhaps you are not a run-of-the-mill Nonconformist, for you are in the Tower, sir.' 'As are you, sergeant.' 'I have a key.' 'Poh! Do you have permission to leave?' This shut him up for a while. 'Our commander is John Churchill,' he said finally, trying a new tack. 'The King no longer entirely trusts him.' 'I was wondering when the King would begin to doubt Churchill's loyalty.' 'He needs us close, as we are his best men – yet not so close as the Horse Guards, hard by Whitehall Palace, within musket-shot of his apartments.' 'And so you have been moved to the Tower for safe-keeping.' 'You've got mail,' said the sergeant, and flung a letter onto the table in front of Daniel. It bore the address: grubendol london. It was from Leibniz. 'It is for you, isn't it? Don't bother denying it, I can see it from the look on your face,' the sergeant continued. 'We had a devil of a time working out who it was supposed to be given to.' 'It is intended for whichever officer of the Royal Society is currently charged with handling foreign correspondence,' Daniel said indignantly, 'and at the moment, that is my honor.' 'You're the one, aren't you? You're the one who conveyed certain letters to William of Orange.' 'There is no incentive for me to supply an answer to that question,' said Daniel after a brief interval of being too appalled to speak. 'Answer this then: do you have friends named Bob Carver and Dick Gripp?' 'Never heard of them.' 'That's funny, for we have come upon a page of written instructions, left with the warder, saying that you're to be allowed no visitors at all, except for Bob Carver and Dick Gripp, who may show up at the oddest hours.' 'I do not know them,' Daniel insisted, 'and I beg you not to let them into this chamber under any circumstances.' 'That's begging a lot, Professor, for the instructions are written out in my lord Jeffreys's own hand, and signed by the same.' 'Then you must know as well as I do that Bob Carver and Dick Gripp are just murderers.' 'What I know is that my lord Jeffreys is Lord Chancellor, and to disobey his command is an act of rebellion.' 'Then I ask you to rebel.' 'You first,' said the sergeant. Hanover, August 1688 Dear Daniel, I haven't the faintest idea where you are, so I will send this to good old GRUBENDOL and pray that it finds you in good health. Soon I depart on a long journey to Italy, where I expect to gather evidence that will sweep away any remaining cobwebs of doubt that may cling to Sophie's family tree. You must think me a fool to devote so much effort to genealogy, but be patient and you'll see there are good reasons for it. I'll pass through Vienna along the way, and, God willing, obtain an audience with the Emperor and tell him of my plans for the Universal Library (the silver-mining project in the Harz has failed – not because there was anything wrong with my inventions, but because the miners feared that they would be thrown out of work, and resisted me in every imaginable way – and so if the Library is to be funded, it will not be from silver mines, but from the coffers of some great Prince). There is danger in any journey and so I wanted to write down some things and send them to you before leaving Hanover. These are fresh ideas – green apples that would give a stomach-ache to any erudite person who consumed them. On my journey I shall have many hours to recast them in phrasings more pious (to placate the Jesuits), pompous (to impress the scholastics), or simple (to flatter the salons), but I trust you will forgive me for writing in a way that is informal and plain-spoken. If I should meet with some misfortune along the way, perhaps you or some future Fellow of the Royal Society may pick up the thread where I've dropped it. Looking about us we can easily perceive diverse Truths, viz. that the sky is blue, the moon round, that humans walk on two legs and dogs on four, and so on. Some of those truths are brute and geometrickal in nature, there is no imaginable way to avoid them, for example that the shortest distance between any two points is a straight line. Until Descartes, everyone supposed that such truths were few in number, and that Euclid and the other ancients had found almost all of them. But when Descartes began his project, we all got into the habit of mapping things into a space that could be described by numbers. We now cross two of Descartes' number-lines at right angles to define a coordinate plane, to which we have given the name Cartesian coordinates, and this conceit appears to be catching on, for one can hardly step into a lecture-room anywhere without seeing some professor drawing a great + on the slate. At any rate, when we all got into the habit of describing the size and position and speed of everything in the world using numbers, lines, curves, and other constructions that are familiar, to erudite men, from Euclid, I say, then it became a sort of vogue to try to explain all of the truths in the universe by geometry. I myself can remember the very moment that I was seduced by this way of thinking: I was fourteen years old, and was wandering around in the Rosenthal outside of Leipzig, ostensibly to smell the blooms but really to prosecute a sort of internal debate in my own mind, between the old ways of the Scholastics and the Mechanical Philosophy of Descartes. As you know I decided in favor of the latter! And I have not ceased to study mathematics since. Descartes himself studied the way balls move and collide, how they gather speed as they go down ramps, et cetera, and tried to explain all of his data in terms of a theory that was purely geometrical in nature. The result of his lucubrations was classically French in that it did not square with reality but it was very beautiful, and logically coherent. Since then our friends Huygens and Wren have expended more toil towards the same end. But I need hardly tell you that it is Newton, far beyond all others, who has vastly expanded the realm of truths that are geometrickal in nature. I truly believe that if Euclid and Eratosthenes could be brought back to life they would prostrate themselves at his feet and (pagans that they were) worship him as a god. For their geometry treated mostly simple abstract shapes, lines in the sand, while Newton's lays down the laws that govern the very planets. I have read the copy of Principia Mathematica that you so kindly sent me, and I know better than to imagine I will find any faults in the author's proofs, or extend his work into any realm he has not already conquered. It has the feel of something finished and complete. It is like a dome – if it were not whole, it would not stand, and because it is whole, and does stand, there's no point trying to add things on to it. And yet its very completeness signals that there is more work to be done. I believe that the great edifice of the Principia Mathematica encloses nearly all of the geometrickal truths that can possibly be written down about the world. But every dome, be it never so large, has an inside and an outside, and while Newton's dome encloses all of the geometrickal truths, it excludes the other kind: truths that have their sources in fitness and in final causes. When Newton encounters such a truth – such as the inverse square law of gravity – he does not even consider trying to understand it, but instead says that the world simply is this way, because that is how God made it. To his way of thinking, any truths of this nature lie outside the realm of Natural Philosophy and belong instead to a realm he thinks is best approached through the study of alchemy. Let me tell you why Newton is wrong. I have been trying to salvage something of value from Descartes' geometrickal theory of collisions and have found it utterly devoid of worth. Descartes holds that when two bodies collide, they should have the same quantity of motion after the collision as they had before. Why does he believe this? Because of empirical observations? No, for apparently he did not make any. Or if he did, he saw only what he wanted to see. He believes it because he has made up his mind in advance that his theory must be geometrickal, and geometry is an austere discipline – there are only certain quantities a geometer is allowed to measure and to write down in his equations. Chief among these is extension, a pompous term for 'anything that can be measured with a ruler.' Descartes and most others allow time, too, because you can measure time with a pendulum, and you can measure the pendulum with a ruler. The distance a body travels (which can be measured with a ruler) divided by the time it took covering it (which can be measured with a pendulum, which can be measured with a ruler) gives speed. Speed figures into Descartes' calculation of Quantity of Motion – the more speed, the more motion. Well enough so far, but then he got it all wrong by treating Quantity of Motion as if it were a scalar, a simple directionless number, when in fact is is a vector. But that is a minor lapse. There is plenty of room for vectors in a system with two orthogonal axes, we simply plot them as arrows on what I call the Cartesian plane, and lo, we have geometrickal constructs that obey geometrickal rules. We can add their components geometrickally, reckon their magnitudes with the Pythagorean Theorem, &c. But there are two problems with this approach. One is relativity. Rulers move. There is no fixed frame of reference for measuring extension. A geometer on a moving canal-boat who tries to measure the speed of a flying bird will get a different number from a geometer on the shore; and a geometer riding on the bird's back would measure no speed at all! Secondly: the Cartesian Quantity of Motion, mass multiplied by velocity ( mv), is not conserved by falling bodies. And yet by doing, or even imagining, a very simple experiment, you can demonstrate that mass multiplied by the square of velocity ( mv2) is conserved by such bodies. This quantity mv2 has certain properties of interest. For one, it measures the amount of work that a moving body is capable of doing. Work is something that has an absolute meaning, it is free from the problem of relativity that I mentioned a moment ago, a problem unavoidably shared by all theories that are founded upon the use of rulers. In the expression mv2 the velocity is squared, which means that it has lost its direction, and no longer has a geometrickal meaning. While mv may be plotted on the Cartesian plane and subjected to all the tricks and techniques of Euclid, mv2 may not be, because in being squared the velocity v has lost its directionality and, if I may wax metaphysical, transcended the geometrickal plane and gone into a new realm, the realm of Algebra. This quantity mv2 is scrupulously conserved by Nature, and its conservation may in fact be considered a law of the universe – but it is outside Geometry, and excluded from the dome that Newton has built, it is another contingent, non-geometrickal truth, one of many that have been discovered, or will be, by Natural Philosophers. Shall we then say, like Newton, that all such truths are made arbitrarily by God? Shall we seek such truths in the occult? For if God has laid these rules down arbitrarily, then they are occult by nature. To me this notion is offensive; it seems to cast God in the rôle of a capricious despot who desires to hide the truth from us. In some things, such as the Pythagorean Theorem, God may not have had any choice when He created the world. In others, such as the inverse square law of gravity, He may have had choices; but in such cases, I like to believe he would have chosen wisely and according to some coherent plan that our minds – insofar as they are in God's image – are capable of understanding. Unlike the Alchemists, who see angels, demons, miracles, and divine essences everywhere, I recognize nothing in the world but bodies and minds. And nothing in bodies but certain observable quantities such as magnitude, figure, situation, and changes in these. Everything else is merely said, not understood; it is sounds without meaning. Nor can anything in the world be understood clearly unless it is reduced to these. Unless physical things can be explained by mechanical laws, God cannot, even if He chooses, reveal and explain nature to us. I am likely to spend the rest of my life explaining these ideas to those who will listen, and defending them from those who won't, and anything you hear from me henceforth should probably be viewed in that light, Daniel. If the Royal Society seems inclined to burn me in effigy, please try to explain to them that I am trying to extend the work that Newton has done, not to tear it down. Leibniz P.S. I know the woman Eliza (de la Zeur, now) whom you mentioned in your most recent letter. She seems to be attracted to Natural Philosophers. It is a strange trait in a woman, but who are we to complain? 'Dr. Waterhouse.' 'Sergeant Shaftoe.' 'Your visitors have arrived – Mr. Bob Carver and Mr. Dick Gripp.' Daniel rose from his bed; he had never come awake so fast. 'Please, I beg you, Sergeant, do not – ' he began, but he stopped there, for it had occurred to him that perhaps Sergeant Shaftoe's mind was already made up, the deed was all but done, and that Daniel was merely groveling. He got to his feet and shuffled over the wooden floor towards Bob Shaftoe's face and his candle, which hung in darkness like a poorly resolved binary star: the face a dim reddish blob, the flame a burning white point. The blood dropped from Daniel's head and he tottered, but did not hesitate. He'd be nothing more than a bleating voice in the darkness until he entered the globe of light balanced on that flame; if Bob Shaftoe had thoughts of letting the murderers into this room, let him look full on Daniel's face first. The brilliance of the light was governed by an inverse square law, just like gravity. Shaftoe's face finally came into focus. He looked a little sea-sick. 'I'm not such a black-hearted bastard as'd admit a pair of hired killers to spit a helpless professor. There is only one man alive whom I hate enough to wish such an end on him.' 'Thank you,' Daniel said, drawing close enough now that he could feel the candle's faint warmth on his face. Shaftoe noticed something, turned sideways to Daniel, and cleared his throat. This was not your delicate pretentious upper-class ‘hem but an honest and legitimate bid to dislodge an actual phlegm-ball that had sprung into his gorge. 'You've noticed me pissing myself, haven't you?' Daniel said. 'You imagine that it's your fault – that you put such a terror into me, just now, that I could not hold my urine. Well, you did have me going, it is true, but that's not why piss is running down my leg. I have the stone, Sergeant, and cannot make water at times of my own choosing, but rather I leak and seep like a keg that wants caulking.' Bob Shaftoe nodded and looked to have been somewhat relieved of his burden of guilt. 'How long d'you have then?' He asked the question so offhandedly that Daniel did not get it for a few moments. 'Oh – you mean, to live ?' The Sergeant nodded. 'Pardon me, Sergeant Shaftoe, I forget that your profession has put you on such intimate terms with death that you speak of it as sea-captains speak of wind. How long have I? Perhaps a year.' 'You could have it cut out.' 'I have seen men cut for the stone, Sergeant, and I'll take death, thank you very much. I'll wager it is worse than anything you may have witnessed on a battlefield. No, I shall follow the example of my mentor, John Wilkins.' 'Men have been cut for the stone, and lived, have they not?' 'Mr. Pepys was cut nigh on thirty years ago, and lives still.' 'He walks? Talks? Makes water?' 'Indeed, Sergeant Shaftoe.' 'Then, by your leave, Dr. Waterhouse, being cut for the stone is not worse than anything I have seen on battlefields.' 'Do you know how the operation is performed, Sergeant? The incision is made through the perineum, which is that tender place between your scrotum and your anus – ' 'If it comes down to swapping blood-curdling tales, Dr. Waterhouse, we shall be here until this candle has burnt down, and all to no purpose; and if you really intend to die of the stone, you oughtn't to be wasting that much time.' 'There is nothing to do, here, but waste time.' 'That is where you are wrong, Dr. Waterhouse, for I have a lively sort of proposition to make you. We are going to help each other, you and I.' 'You want money in exchange for keeping Jeffreys's murderers out of my chamber?' 'That's what I should want, were I a base, craven toad,' Bob Shaftoe said. 'And if you keep mistaking me for that sort, why, perhaps I shall let Bob and Dick in here.' 'Please forgive me, Sergeant. You are right in being angry with me. It is only that I cannot imagine what sort of transaction you and I could . . .' 'Did you see that fellow being whipped, just before sundown? He would've been visible to you out in the dry-moat, through yonder arrow-slit.' Daniel remembered it well enough. Three soldiers had gone out, carrying their pikes, and lashed them together close to their points, and spread their butts apart to form a tripod. A man had been led out shirtless, his hands tied together in front of him, and the rope had then been thrown over the lashing where the pikes were joined, and drawn tight so that his arms were stretched out above his head. Finally his ankles had been spread apart and lashed fast to the pikes to either side of him, rendering him perfectly immobile, and then a large man had come out with a whip, and used it. All in all it was a common rite around military camps, and went a long way towards explaining why people of means tried to live as far away from barracks as possible. 'I did not observe it closely,' Daniel said, 'I am familiar with the general procedure.' 'You might've watched more carefully had you known that the man being whipped calls himself Mr. Dick Gripp.' Daniel was at a loss for words. 'They came for you last night,' said Bob Shaftoe. 'I had them clapped into separate cells while I decided what to do with 'em. Talked to 'em separately, and all they gave me was a deal of hot talk. Now. Some men are entitled to talk that way, they have been ennobled, in a sense, by their deeds and the things they have lived through. I did not think that Bob Carver and Dick Gripp were men of that kind. Others may be suffered to talk that way simply because they entertain the rest of us. I once had a brother who was like that. But not Bob and Dick. Unfortunately I am not a magistrate and have no power to throw men in prison, compel them to answer questions, et cetera. On the other hand, I am a sergeant, and have the power to recruit men into the King's service. As Bob and Dick were clearly idle fellows, I recruited them into the King's Own Black Torrent Guards on the spot. In the next instant, I perceived that I'd made a mistake, for these two were discipline problems, and wanted chastisement. Using the oldest trick in the book, I had Dick – who struck me as the better man – whipped directly in front of Bob Carver's cell window. Now Dick is a strong bloke, he is unbowed, and I may keep him in the regiment. But Bob feels about his chastisement – which is scheduled for dawn – the same way you feel about being cut for the stone. So an hour ago he woke up his guards, and they woke me, and I went and had a chat with Mr. Carver.' 'Sergeant, you are so industrious that I almost cannot follow everything you are about.' 'He told me that Jeffreys personally ordered him and Mr. Gripp to cut your throat. That they were to do it slow-like, and that they were to explain to you, while you lay dying, that it had been done by Jeffreys.' 'It is what I expected,' Daniel said, 'and yet to hear it set out in plain words leaves me dizzy.' 'Then I shall wait for you to get your wits back. More to the point, I shall wait for you to become angry. Forgive me for presuming to instruct a fellow of your erudition, but at a moment like this, you are supposed to be angry.' 'It is a very odd thing about Jeffreys that he can treat people abominably and never make them angry. He influences his victims' minds strangely, like a glass rod bending a stream of water, so that we feel we deserve it.' 'You have known him a long time.' 'I have.' 'Let's kill him.' 'I beg your pardon?' 'Slay, murder. Let us bring about his death, so he won't plague you any more.' Daniel was shocked. 'It is an extremely fanciful idea – ' 'Not in the least. And there is something in your tone of voice that tells me you like it.' 'Why do you say ‘we'? You have no part in my problems.' 'You are high up in the Royal Society.' 'Yes.' 'You know many Alchemists.' 'I wish I could deny it.' 'You know my lord Upnor.' 'I do. I've known him as long as I've known Jeffreys.' 'Upnor owns my lady love.' 'I beg your pardon – did you say he owns her?' 'Yes – Jeffreys sold her to him during the Bloody Assizes.' 'Taunton – your love is one of the Taunton schoolgirls!' 'Just so.' Daniel was fascinated. 'You are proposing some sort of pact.' 'You and I'll rid the world of Jeffreys and Upnor. I'll have my Abigail and you'll live your last year, or whatever time God affords you, in peace.' 'I do not mean to quail and fret, Sergeant – ' 'Go ahead! My men do it all the time.' “ – but may I remind you that Jeffreys is the Lord Chancellor of the Realm?' 'Not for long,' Shaftoe answered. 'How do you know?' 'He's as much as admitted it, by his actions! You were thrown in Tower why?' 'For acting as go-between to William of Orange.' 'Why, that is treason – you should've been half-hanged, drawn, and quartered for it! But you were kept alive why?' 'Because I am a witness to the birth of the Prince, and as such, may be useful in attesting to the legitimacy of the next King.' 'If Jeffreys has now decided to kill you, what does that signify then?' 'That he is giving up on the King – my God, on the entire dynasty:and getting ready to flee. Yes, I understand your reasoning now, thank you for being so patient with me.' 'Mind you, I'm not asking you to take up arms, or do anything else that ill suits you.' 'Some would take offense at that, Sergeant, but – ' 'E'en though my chief grievance may lie with Upnor, the first cause of it was Jeffreys, and I would not hesitate to swing my spadroon, if he should chance to show me his neck.' 'Save it for Upnor,' Daniel said, after a brief pause to make up his mind. In truth, he'd long since made it up; but he wanted to put on a show of thinking about it, so that Bob Shaftoe would not view him as a man who took such things lightly. 'You're with me, then.' 'Not so much that I am with you as that we are with most of England, and England with us. You speak of putting Jeffreys to death with the strength of your right arm. Yet I tell you that if we must rely on your arm, strong as it is, we would fail. But if, as I believe, England is with us, why, then we need do no more than find him and say in a clear voice, ‘This fellow here is my lord Jeffreys,' and his death will follow as if by natural law, like a ball rolling down a ramp. This is what I mean when I speak of revolution.' 'Is that a French way of saying ‘rebellion'?' 'No, rebellion is what the Duke of Monmouth did, it is a petty disturbance, an aberration, predestined to fail. Revolution is like the wheeling of stars round the pole. It is driven by unseen powers, it is inexorable, it moves all things at once, and men of discrimination may understand it, predict it, benefit from it.' 'Then I'd best go find a man of discrimination,' muttered Bob Shaftoe, 'and stop wasting the night with a hapless wretch.' 'I simply have not understood, until now, how I might benefit from the revolution. I have done all for England, naught for myself, and I have lacked any organizing principle by which to shape my plans. Never would I have dared to imagine I might strike Jeffreys down!' 'As a mudlark, Vagabond soldier, I am always at your service, to be a bringer of base, murderous thoughts,' said Bob Shaftoe. Daniel had receded to the outer fringes of the light and worried a candle out of a bottle on his writing-table. He hustled back and lit it from Bob's candle. Bob remarked, 'I've seen lords die on battlefields – not as often as I'd prefer, mind you – but enough to know it's not like in paintings.' 'Paintings?' 'You know, where Victory comes down on a sunbeam with her tits hanging out of her frock, waving a laurel for said dying lord's brow, and the Virgin Mary slides down on another to – ' 'Oh, yes. Those paintings. Yes, I believe what you say.' Daniel had been working his way along the curving wall of the Tower, holding the candle close to the stone, so that its glancing light would deepen the scratchings made there by prisoners over the centuries. He stopped before a new one, a half-finished complex of arcs and rays that cut through older graffiti. 'I do not think I shall finish this proof,' he announced, after gazing at it for a few moments. 'We'll not leave tonight. You shall likely have a week – maybe more. So there's no cause for breaking off work on whatever that is.' 'It is an ancient thing that used to make sense, but now it has been turned upside-down, and seems only a queer, jumbled bag of notions. Let it bide here with the other old things,' Daniel said. Château Juvisy NOVEMBER 1688 From Monsieur Bonaventure Rossignol, Château Juvisy To His Majesty Louis XIV, Versailles 21 November 1688 Sire, It was my father's honor to serve your majesty and your majesty's father as cryptanalyst to the Court. Of the art of decipherment, he endeavoured to teach me all that he knew. Moved by a son's love for his father as well as by a subject's ardent desire to be of service to his King, I strove to learn as much as my lesser faculties would permit; and if, when my father died six years ago, he had imparted to me a tenth part of what he knew, why then it sufficed to make me more nearly fit to serve as your majesty's cryptanalyst than any man in Christendom; a measure, not of my eminence (for I cannot claim to possess any) but of my father's, and of the degraded condition of cryptography in the uncouth nations that surround France as barbarian hordes once hemmed in mighty Rome. Along with some moiety of his knowledge, I have inherited the salary your beneficent majesty bestowed upon him, and the château that Le Nôtre built for him at Juvisy, which your majesty knows well, as you have more than once honored it with your presence, and graced it with your wit, as you journeyed to and from Fontainebleau. Many affairs of state have been discussed in the petit salon and the garden; for your father of blessed memory, and Cardinal Richelieu, also were known to ennoble this poor house with their presences during the days when my father, by decyphering the communications passing into and out of the fortifications of the Huguenots, was helping to suppress the rebellions of those heretics. Map of the Rhine Valley Than your majesty no monarch has been more keenly alive to the importance of cryptography. It is only to this acuity on your majesty's part, and not to any intrinsic merit of mine, that I attribute the honors and wealth that you have showered upon me. And it is only because of your majesty's oft-demonstrated interest in these affairs that I presume to pick up my quill and to write down a tale of cryptanalysis that is not without certain extraordinary features. As your majesty knows, the incomparable château at Versailles is adorned by several ladies who are indefatigable writers of letters, notably my friend Madame de Sévigné; la Palatine; and Eliza, the Countess de la Zeur. There are many others, too; but we who have the honor of serving in your majesty's cabinet noir spend as much time reading the correspondence of these three as of all the other ladies of Versailles combined. My narrative chiefly concerns the Countess de la Zeur. She writes frequently to M. le comte d'Avaux in the Hague, using the approved cypher to shield her correspondence from my Dutch counterparts. As well she carries on a steady flow of correspondence to certain Jews of Amsterdam, consisting predominantly of numbers and financial argot that, read, cannot be decyphered, and decyphered, cannot be understood, unless one is familiar with the workings of that city's commodities markets, as vulgar as they are complex. These letters are exceptionally pithy, and of no interest to anyone save Jews, Dutchmen, and other persons who are motivated by money. Her most voluminous letters by far go to the Hanoverian savant Leibniz, whose name is known to your majesty – he made a computing machine for Colbert some years ago, and now toils as an advisor to the Duke and Duchess of Hanover, whose exertions on behalf of united Protestantism have been the cause of so much displeasure to your majesty. Ostensibly the letters of the Countess de la Zeur to this Leibniz consist of interminable descriptions of the magnificence of Versailles and its inhabitants. The sheer volume and consistency of this correspondence have caused me to wonder whether it was not a channel of encrypted communications; but my poor efforts at finding any hidden patterns in her flowery words have been unavailing. Indeed, my suspicion of this woman is grounded, not on any flaw in her cypher – which, assuming it exists at all, is a very good one – but on what little understanding I may claim to possess of human nature. For during my occasional visits to Versailles I have sought this woman out, and engaged her in conversation, and found her to be highly intelligent, and conversant with the latest work of mathematicians and Natural Philosophers both foreign and domestic. And of course the brilliance and erudition of Leibniz is acknowledged by all. It is implausible to me that such a woman could devote so much time to writing, and such a man so much time to reading, about hair. Perhaps two years ago, M. le comte d'Avaux, on one of his visits to your majesty's court, sought me out, and, knowing of my position in the cabinet noir, asked many pointed questions about the Countess's epistolary habits. From this it was plain enough that he shared some of my suspicions. Later he told me that he had witnessed with his own eyes an incident in which it was made obvious that this woman was an agent of the Prince of Orange. D'Avaux at this time mentioned a Swiss gentleman of the name of Fatio de Duilliers, and intimated that he and the Countess de la Zeur were in some way linked. D'Avaux seemed confident that he knew enough to crush this woman. Instead of doing so outright, he had decided that he could better serve your majesty by pursuing a more complex and, by your majesty's leave, risky strategy. As is well known, she makes money for many of your majesty's vassals, including d'Avaux, by managing their investments. The price of liquidating her outright would be high; not a consideration that would ever confound your majesty's judgment, but telling among men of weak minds and light purses. Moreover, d'Avaux shared my suspicion that she was communicating over some encrypted channel with Sophie and, through Sophie, with William, and hoped that if I were to achieve a cryptological break of this channel the cabinet noir might thereafter read her despatches without her being aware of it; which would be altogether more beneficial to France and pleasing to your majesty than locking the woman up in a nunnery and keeping her incommunicado to the end of her days, as she deserves. There had been during the first part of this year a sort of flirtation between the Countess de la Zeur and la Palatine, which appeared to culminate in August when the Countess accepted an invitation from Madame to join her (and your majesty's brother) at St. Cloud. Everyone who knew of this assumed that it was a common, albeit Sapphic, love affair: an interpretation so obvious that it ought by its nature to have engendered more skepticism among those who pride themselves on their sophistication. But it was summer, the weather was warm, and no one paid it any heed. Not long after her arrival at St. Cloud, the Countess sent a letter to d'Avaux in the Hague, which has subsequently found its way back to my writing desk. Here it is. St. Cloud AUGUST 1688 Eliza, Countess de la Zeur, to d'Avaux 16 August 1688 Monsieur, Summer has reached its pinnacle here and for those, such as Madame, who like to hunt wild animals, the best months lie in the future. But for those, such as Monsieur, who prefer to hunt (or be hunted by) highly cultivated humans, this is the very best time of the year. So Madame endures the heat, and sits with her lap-dogs and writes letters, while Monsieur's only complaint is that the torrid weather causes his makeup to run. St. Cloud is infested with young men, aficionados of fencing, who would give anything to sheathe their blades in his scabbard. To judge from the noises emanating from his bedchamber, his chief lover is the Chevalier de Lorraine. But when the Chevalier is spent, the Marquis d'Effiat is never far behind; and behind him (as it were) is a whole queue of handsome cavaliers. In other words, here as at Versailles, there is a strict pecking-order (though one must imagine a different sort of pecking), and so most of these young blades can never hope to be anything more than ornaments. Yet they are continually lustful like any other men. Since they cannot satiate themselves on Monsieur inside the château, they practice on one another in the gardens. One cannot go for a stroll or a ride without breaking into the middle of a tryst. And when these young men are interrupted, they do not slink away meekly, but (emboldened by the favor shown them by Monsieur) upbraid one in the most abusive way imaginable. Wherever I go, my nose detects the humour of lust wafted on every draught and breeze, for it is spilled about the place like wine-slops in a tavern. Liselotte has been putting up with this for seventeen years now, ever since the day when she crossed over the Rhine, never to cross back. And so it's no wonder that she ventures out into society only rarely, and prefers the company of her dogs and her ink-well. Madame has been known to grow very attached to members of her household – she used to have a lady-in-waiting named Théobon who was a great comfort to her. But the lovers of Monsieur – who are supported by him, and who have nothing to do all day long but hatch plots – began to whisper vile rumors into Monsieur's ear, and caused him to send this Théobon away. Madame was so angry that she complained to the King himself. The King reprimanded Monsieur's lovers but balked at intervening in the household affairs of his own brother, and so Théobon has presumably ended up in a convent somewhere, and will never return. From time to time they entertain guests here, and then, as you know, protocol dictates that everyone dress up in the sort of costume known as en manteau , which is even stiffer and less comfortable (if you can imagine it) than dressing en grand habit as is done at Versailles. As an ambassador, you see women dressed in that manner all the time, but as a man, you never see machinations that go on in ladies' private chambers for hours ahead of time, to make them look that way. Dressing en manteau is an engineering project at least as complicated as rigging a ship. Neither can even be contemplated without a large and well-trained crew. But Madame's household has been reduced to a skeleton crew by the ceaseless petty intrigues of the lovers of Monsieur. And in any case she has no patience with female vanities. She is old enough, and foreign enough, and intelligent enough, to understand that Fashion (which lesser women view as if it were Gravity) was merely an invention, a device. It was devised by Colbert as a way to neutralize those Frenchmen and Frenchwomen who, because of their wealth and independence, posed the greatest threat to the King. But Liselotte, who might have been formidable, has already been neutralized by marrying Monsieur and joining the royal family. The only thing that prevents her country from being annexed to France is a dispute as to whether she, or another descendant of the Winter Queen, should succeed her late brother. At any rate, Liselotte refuses to play the game that Colbert devised. She has a wardrobe, of course, and it includes several costumes that are worthy of the names grand habit and manteau. But she has had them made up in a way that is unique. In Madame's wardrobe, all the layers of lingerie, corsetry, petticoats, and outer garments that normally go on one at a time are sewn together into a single construct, so heavy and stiff that it stands by itself, and slit up the back. When Monsieur throws a grand party, Liselotte plods naked into her closet and walks into one of these and stands for a few moments as a lady-in-waiting fastens it in the back with diverse buttons, hooks, and ties. From there she goes straight to the party, without so much as a glance in the mirror. I will complete this little portrait of life at St. Cloud with a story about dogs. As I mentioned, la Palatine, like Artemis, is never far from her pack of dogs. Of course these are not swift hounds, but tiny lap-dogs that curl up on her feet in the winter to keep her toes warm. She has named them after people and places she remembers from her childhood in the Palatinate. They scurry about her apartments all day long, getting into absurd feuds and controversies, just like so many courtiers. Sometimes she herds them out onto the lawn and they run around in the sunshine interrupting the amours of Monsieur's hangers-on, and then the peace of these exquisite gardens is broken by the angry shouts of the lovers and the yelps of the dogs; the cavaliers, with their breeches down around their ankles, chase them out from their trysting-places, and Monsieur comes out onto his balcony in his dressing-gown and damns them all to hell and wonders aloud why God cursed him to marry Liselotte. The King has a pair of hunting-dogs named Phobos and Deimos who are very aptly named, for they have been fed on the King's own table-scraps and have grown enormous. The King has indulged them terribly and so they want discipline, and feel they are entitled to attack whatever strikes their fancy. Knowing how much Liselotte loves hunting and dogs, and knowing how lonely and isolated she is, the King has tried to interest her in these beasts – he wants Liselotte to think of Phobos and Deimos as her own pets and to look upon them with affection, as the King does, so that they can go hunting for large game in the east when the season comes around. So far this is nothing more than a proposal. Madame is more than a little ambivalent. Phobos and Deimos are too big and unruly to be kept at Versailles any more, and so the King prevailed upon his brother to keep them at St. Cloud, in a paddock where they can run around loose. The beasts have long since killed and eaten all of the rabbits who used to dwell in that enclosure, and now they devote all their energies to searching for weak places in the fence where they might tunnel out or jump over and go marauding in the territory beyond. Recently they broke through the southeast corner and got loose in the yard beyond and killed all the chickens. That hole has been repaired. As I write this I can see Phobos patrolling the northern fence-line, looking for a way to jump over into the neighboring property, which is owned by another nobleman who has never had good relations with my hosts. Meanwhile Deimos is working on an excavation under the eastern wall, hoping to tunnel through and run amok in the yard where Madame exercises her lap-dogs. I have no idea which of them will succeed first. Now I must lay down my pen, for some months ago I promised Madame that I would one day give her a demonstration of bareback riding, Qwghlmian-style, and now the time is finally at hand. I hope that my little description of life at St. Cloud has not struck you as overly vulgar, but since you, like any sophisticated man, are a student of the human condition, I thought you might be fascinated to learn what peasant-like noise and rancor prevail behind the supremely elegant façade of St. Cloud. Eliza, Countess de la Zeur Rossignol to Louis XIV Continued Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) NOVEMBER 1688 Your majesty will already have perceived that Phobos and Deimos are metaphors for the armed might of France; their chicken-killing escapade is the recent campaign in which your majesty brought the rebellious Protestants of Savoy to heel; and the question of where they might attack next, a way of saying that the Countess could not guess whether your majesty intended to strike north into the Dutch Republic or east into the Palatinate. Just as obviously, these sentences were written as much for William of Orange – whose servants would read the letter before it reached d'Avaux – as for the recipient. Perhaps less transparent is the reference to bareback riding. I would have assumed it signified some erotic practice, except that the Countess is never so vulgar in her letters. In time I came to understand that it was meant literally. As hard as it might be for your majesty to believe, I have it on the authority of several of Monsieur's friends that Madame and the Countess de la Zeur did indeed go riding that day, and moreover that the latter requested that no saddle be placed on her horse. They rode off into the park thus, escorted by two of Madame's young male cousins from Hanover. But when they returned, the Countess's horse was bare, not only of saddle, but of rider, too; for, as the story went, she had fallen off after the horse had been startled, and suffered an injury that made it impossible for her to ride back. This had occurred near the banks of the river. Fortunately they had been able to summon a passing boat, which had taken the injured Countess upriver to a nearby convent that is generously supported by Madame. There, or so the story went, the Countess would be tended to by the nuns until her bones had mended. Needless to say, no one but the smallest child would believe such a story; everyone assumed the obvious, which is that the Countess had become pregnant and that her period of recuperation in the nunnery was to last only long enough for her to arrange an abortion, or to deliver the baby. I myself gave it no further thought until I received a communication from d'Avaux several weeks later. This was, of course, encyphered. I enclose the plaintext, shorn of pleasantries, formalities, and other impedimenta. French Embassy, the Hague 17 SEPTEMBER 1688 From Jean Antoine de Mesmes, comte d'Avaux French Embassy, the Hague To Monsieur Bonaventure Rossignol Château Juvisy, France Monsieur Rossignol, You and I have had occasion to speak of the Countess de la Zeur. I have known for some time that her true allegiance lay with the Prince of Orange. Until today she has been at pains to conceal this. Now she has at last run her true colors up the mast. Everyone believes she is in a nunnery near St. Cloud having a baby. But today, below the very battlements of the Binnenhof, she disembarked from a canal-boat that had just come down from Nijmegen. Most of the heretics who came pouring out of it had originated from much farther upstream, for they are people of the Palatinate who, knowing that an invasion was imminent, have lately fled from that place as rats are said to do from a house in the moments before an earthquake. To give you an idea of their quality, among them were at least two Princesses (Eleanor of Saxe-Eisenach and her daughter Wilhelmina Caroline of Brandenburg-Ansbach), as well as any number of other persons of rank; though as much could never have been guessed from their degraded and bedraggled appearance. Consequently the Countess de le Zeur – who was even more dishevelled than most – attracted less notice than is her wont. But I know that she was there, for my sources in the Binnenhof inform me that the Prince of Orange ordered a suite to be made available to her, for a stay of indefinite duration. Previously she has been coy about her dealings with the said Prince; today she lives in his house. I shall have more to say on this later, but for now I should like to ask the rhetorical question of how this woman was able to get from St. Cloud to the Hague, via the Rhine, in one month, during the preparations for a war, without anyone's having noticed? That she was working as a spy for the Prince of Orange is too obvious to mention; but where did she go, and what is she now telling William in the Binnenhof? Yours in haste, d'Avaux Rossignol to Louis XIV Continued NOVEMBER 1688 Your majesty will already have understood how fascinated I was by this news from d'Avaux. The letter had reached me after a considerable delay, as, owing to the war, d'Avaux had been forced to show some ingenuity in finding a way to have it delivered to Juvisy. I knew that I could not expect to receive any more, and to attempt to respond in kind would have been a waste of paper. Accordingly, I resolved to travel in person, and incognito , to the Hague. For to be of service to your majesty is my last thought as I go to bed in the night-time and my first upon waking in the morning; and it was plain that where this matter was concerned I was useless so long as I remained at home. Of my journey to the Hague, much could be written in a vulgar and sensational vein, if I felt that I could better serve your majesty by producing an entertainment. But it is all beside the point of this report. And as better men than I have sacrificed their lives in your service with no thought of fame, or of reward beyond a small share in the glory of la France, I do not think it is meet for me to relate my tale here; after all, what an Englishman (for example) might fancy to be a stirring and glorious adventure is, to a gentleman of France, altogether routine and unremarkable. I arrived in the Hague on the 18th of October and reported to the French embassy, where M. le comte d'Avaux saw to it that what remained of my clothing was burned in the street; that the body of my manservant was given a Christian burial; that my horse was destroyed so that he would not infect the others; and that my pitchfork-wounds and torch-burns were tended to by a French barber-surgeon who dwells in that city. On the following day I began my investigation, which naturally was erected upon the solid foundation that had been laid by d'Avaux during the weeks since his letter to me. As it happened, it was on this very day – the 19th of October, anno domini 1688 – that an unfortunate change in the wind made it possible for the Prince of Orange to set sail for England at the head of five hundred Dutch ships. As distressing as this event was for the small colony of French in the Hague, it militated to our advantage in that the heretics who engulfed us were so beside themselves (for to them, invading other countries is a new thing, and a tremendous adventure) that they paid me little heed as I went about my work. My first task, as I have suggested, was to familiarize myself with all that d'Avaux had learned of the matter during the previous weeks. The Hofgebied, or diplomatic quarter of the Hague, may not contain as many servants and courtiers as its counterpart in France, but there are more than enough; those who are venal, d'Avaux has bought, and those who are venereal, he has compromised in one way or another, so that he may know practically anything he wishes to of what goes on in that neighborhood, provided only that he has the diligence to interview his sources, and the wit to combine their fragmentary accounts into a coherent story. Your majesty will in no way be surprised to learn that he had done so by the time of my arrival. D'Avaux imparted to me the following: First,that the Countess de la Zeur, unlike all of the other refugees on the canal-ship, had not taken it all the way from Heidelberg. Rather, she had embarked at Nijmegen, filthy and exhausted, and accompanied by two young gentlemen, also much the worse for wear, whose accents marked them as men of the Rhineland. This in itself told me much. It had already been obvious that on that August day at St. Cloud, Madame had made some arrangement to spirit the Countess aboard a boat on the Seine. By working its way upstream to Paris, such a vessel could take the left fork at Charenton and go up the Marne deep into the northeastern reaches of your majesty's realm, within a few days' overland journey of Madame's homeland. It is not the purpose of this letter to cast aspersions on the loyalty of your sister-in-law; I suspect that the Countess de la Zeur, so notorious for her cunning, had preyed upon Madame's natural and humane concern for her subjects across the Rhine, and somehow induced her to believe that it would be beneficial to despatch the Countess on a sight-seeing expedition to that part of the world. Of course this would take the Countess into just that part of France where preparations for war would be most obvious to a foreign spy. Your majesty during his innumerable glorious campaigns has devoted many hours to studying maps, and contemplating all matters of logistics, from grand strategy down to the smallest detail, and will recollect that there is no direct connection by water from the Marne to any of the rivers that flow down into the Low Countries. The Argonne Forest, however, nurses the headwaters, not only of the Marne, but also of the Meuse, which indeed passes to within a few miles of Nijmegen. And so, just as d'Avaux had already done before me, I settled upon the working hypothesis that after taking a boat from St. Cloud up the Marne, the Countess had disembarked in the vicinity of the Argonne – which as your majesty well knows was an active theatre of military operations during these weeks – and made some sort of overland journey that had eventually taken her to the Meuse, and via the Meuse to Nijmegen where we have our first report of her from d'Avaux's informants. Second, all who saw her on the Nijmegen-Hague route agree that she had practically nothing with her. She had no luggage. Her personal effects, such as they were, were stored in the saddlebag of one of her German companions. Everything was soaked through, for in the days before her appearance at Nijmegen the weather had been rainy. During the voyage on the canal-ship, she and the two Germans emptied the saddlebags and spread out their contents on the deck to dry. At no time were any books, papers, or documents of any kind observed, and no quills or ink. In her hands she carried a small bag and an embroidery frame with a piece of crewel-work mounted on it. There was nothing else. All of this is confirmed by d'Avaux's informants in the Binnenhof. The servants who furnished the Countess's suite there insist that nothing came off the canal-boat save: (Item) The dress on the Countess's back. Mildewed and creased from (one assumes) a lengthy journey in the bottom of a saddlebag, this was torn up for rags as soon as she peeled it off. Nothing was hidden beneath. (Item) A set of boy's clothing approximately the Countess's size, badly worn and filthy. (Item) The embroidery frame and crewel-work, which had been ruined by repeated soakings and dryings (the colors of the thread had run into the fabric). (Item) Her handbag, which turned out to contain nothing but a scrap of soap, a comb, an assortment of rags, a sewing-kit, and a nearly empty coin-purse. Of the items mentioned, all were removed or destroyed save the coins, the sewing-kit, and the embroidery project. The Countess showed a curiously strong attachment to the latter, mentioning to the servants that they were not to touch it, be it never so badly damaged, and even keeping it under her pillow when she slept, for fear that it might be taken away by mistake and used as a rag. Third, after she had recuperated for a day, and been supplied with presentable clothing, she went to the forest-hut of the Prince of Orange that is out in the wilderness nearby, and met with him and his advisors on three consecutive days. Immediately thereafter the Prince withdrew his regiments from the south and set in motion his invasion of England. It is said that the Countess produced, as if by sorcery, a voluminous report filled with names, facts, figures, maps, and other details difficult to retain in the memory. So much for d'Avaux's work. He had given me all that I could have asked for as a cryptologist. It remained only for me to apply Occam's Razor to the facts that d'Avaux had amassed. My conclusion was that the Countess had made her notes, not with ink on paper, but with needle and thread on a work of embroidery. The technique, though extraordinary, had certain advantages. A woman who is forever writing things down on paper makes herself extremely conspicuous, but no one pays any notice to a woman doing needle-work. If a person is suspected of being a spy, and their possessions searched, paper is the first thing an investigator looks for. Crewel-work will be ignored. Finally, paper-and-ink documents fare poorly in damp conditions, but a textile document would have to be unraveled thread by thread before its information was destroyed. By the time of my arrival in the Hague, the Countess had vacated her chambers in the Binnenhof and moved across the Plein to the house of the heretic 'philosopher' Christiaan Huygens, who is her friend. On the day of my arrival she departed for Amsterdam to pay a call on her business associates there. I paid a cat-burglar, who has done many such jobs for d'Avaux in the past, to enter the house of Huygens, find the embroidery, and bring it to me without disturbing anything else in the room. Three days later, after I had conducted an analysis detailed below, I arranged for the same thief to put the embroidery back just where he had found it. The Countess did not return from her sojourn to Amsterdam until several days afterwards. It is a piece of coarsely woven linen, square, one Flemish ell on a side. She has left a margin all round the edges of about a hand's breadth. The area in the center, then, is a square perhaps eighteen inches on a side: suitable for an opus pulvinarium or cushion-cover. This area has been almost entirely covered in crewel-work. The style is called gros-point, a technique that is popular among English peasants, overseas colonists, and other rustics who amuse themselves sewing naïve designs upon the crude textiles they know how to produce. As it has been superseded, in France, by petit-point, it may be unfamiliar to your majesty, and so I will permit myself the indulgence of a brief description. The fabric or matrix is always of a coarse weave, so that the warp and weft may be seen by the naked eye, forming a regular square grid à la Descartes. Each of the tiny squares in this grid is covered, during the course of the work, by a stitch in the shape of a letter x, forming a square of color that, seen from a distance, becomes one tiny element of the picture being fashioned. Pictures formed in this manner necessarily have a jagged-edged appearance, particularly where an effort has been made to approximate a curve; which explains why such pieces have been all but banished from Versailles and other places where taste and discrimination have vanquished sentimentality. In spite of which your majesty may easily envision the appearance of one of these minute x -shaped stitches when viewed closely: one leg running from northwest to southeast, as it were, and the other southwest to northeast. The two legs cross in the center. One must lie over the other. Which lies on top is a simple matter of the order in which they were laid down. Some embroiderers are creatures of habit, always performing the stitches in the same sequence, so that one of the legs invariably lies atop the other. Others are not so regular. As I examined the Countess's work through a magnifying lens, I saw that she was one of the latter – which I found noteworthy, as she is in other respects a person of the most regular and disciplined habits. It occurred to me to wonder whether the orientations of the overlying legs might be a hidden vector of information. The pitch of the canvas's weave was about twenty threads per inch. A quick calculation showed that the total number of threads along each side would be around 360, forming nearly 130,000 squares. A single square by itself could only convey a scintilla of information, as it can only possess one of two possible states: either the northwest-southeast leg is on top, or the southwest-northeast. This might seem useless; as how can one write a message in an alphabet of only two letters? Mirabile dictu,there is a way to do just that, which I had recently heard about because of the loose tongue of a gentleman who has already been mentioned: Fatio de Duilliers. This Fatio fled to England after the Continent became a hostile place for him, and befriended a prominent English Alchemist by the name of Newton. He has become a sort of Ganymede to Newton's Zeus, and follows him wherever he can; when they are perforce separated, he prates to anyone who will listen about his close relationship to the great man. I know this from Signore Vigani, an Alchemist who is at the same college with Newton and so is often forced to break bread with Fatio. Fatio is prone to irrational jealousy, and he endlessly schemes to damage the reputation of anyone he imagines may be a rival for Newton's affections. One such is a Dr. Waterhouse, who shared a room with Newton when they were boys, and for all I know buggered him; but the facts do not matter, only Fatio's imaginings. In the library of the Royal Society, Fatio recently happened upon Dr. Waterhouse sleeping over some papers on which he had been working out a calculation consisting entirely of ones and zeroes – a mathematical curiosity much studied by Leibniz. Dr. Waterhouse woke up before Fatio could get a closer look at what he had been doing; but as the document in question appeared to be a letter from abroad, he inferred that it might be some sort of cryptographic scheme. Not long after, he went to Cambridge with Newton and let this story drop at High Table so that all could know how clever he was, and that Waterhouse was certainly a dolt and probably a spy. From my records of the cabinet noir I knew that the Countess de la Zeur had sent a letter to the Royal Society at the same time, and that she has had business contacts with the brother of Dr. Waterhouse. And I have already mentioned her suspiciously voluminous and inane correspondence with Leibniz. And so once again applying Occam's Razor I formulated the hypothesis that the Countess uses a cypher, probably invented by Leibniz, based upon binary arithmetic, which is to say consisting of ones and zeroes: an alphabet of two letters, perfectly suited to representation in cross-stitch embroidery, as I have explained. I enlisted a clerk from the Embassy, who had keen eyesight, to go over the embroidery stitch by stitch, marking down a numeral 1 for each square in which the northwest-to-southeast leg lay on top, and a 0 otherwise. I then applied myself to the problem of breaking the cypher. A series of binary digits can represent a number; for example, 01001 is equal to 9. Five binary digits can represent up to 32 different numbers, sufficient to encypher the entire Roman alphabet. My early efforts assumed that the Countess's cypher was of that sort; but alas, I found no intelligible message, and no patterns tending to give me hope that my fortunes would ever change. Presently I departed from the Hague, taking the transcript of ones and zeroes with me, and bought passage on a small ship down the coast to Dunquerque. Most of the crew on this vessel were Flemish, but there were a few who looked different from the rest and who spoke to one another in a pithy, guttural tongue unlike any I had ever heard. I asked where they were from – for they were redoubtable seamen all – and they answered with no little pride that they were men of Qwghlm. At this moment I knew that Divine Providence had led me to this boat. I asked them many questions concerning their extraordinary language and their way of writing: a system of runes that is as primitive as an alphabet can possibly be and yet be worthy of the name. It contains no vowels, and sixteen consonants, several of which cannot be pronounced by anyone who was not born on that rock. As it happens, an alphabet of sixteen letters is perfectly suited to translation into a binary cypher, for only four binary digits – or four stitches of embroidery – are required to represent a single letter. The Qwghlmian language is almost unbelievably pithy – one of these people can say with a few grunts, gags, and stutters what would take a Frenchman several sentences – and little known outside of that God-cursed place. Both of which made it perfectly suited to the purposes of the Countess, who need communicate, in this case, only with herself. In sum, the Qwghlmian language need not be encyphered, for it is already a nearly perfect cypher to begin with. I tried the experiment of breaking down the transcribed 1s and 0s into groups of four and translating each group into a number between 1 and 16, and shortly began to see patterns of the sort that give a cryptographer great confidence that he is progressing rapidly to a solution. Upon my return to Paris I was able to find in the Bibliothèque du Roi a scholarly work about Qwghlmian runes, and thereby to translate the list of numbers into that alphabet – some 30,000 runes in all. A cursory comparison of the results against the word-list in the back of this tome suggested that I was on the correct path to a full solution; but to translate it was beyond my powers. I consulted with Father Édouard de Gex, who has lately taken an interest in Qwghlm, hoping to convert it to the True Faith and make it a thorn in the side of the heretics. He referred me to Father Mxnghr of the Society of Jesus in Dublin, who is a Qwghlmian born and bred, and known to be absolutely loyal to your majesty as he travels frequently to Qwghlm, at great risk, to baptize the people there. I sent him the transcript and he replied, some weeks later, with a translation of the text into Latin that ran to almost forty thousand words; which is to say that it requires more than one word in Latin to convey what is signified by a single rune in Qwghlmian. This text is so pithy and fragmentary as to be nearly unreadable, and makes use of many curious word substitutions – “gun' written as 'England stick' and so on. Much of its bulk consists of tedious lists of names, regiments, places, et cetera, which are of course staples of espionage, but of little interest now that the war has begun and everything become fluid. Some of it, however, is personal narrative that she apparently set down in crewel when she was bored. This material solves the riddle of how she got from St. Cloud to Nijmegen. I have taken the liberty of translating it into a more elevated style and redacting it into a coherent, if episodic narrative, which is copied out below for your majesty's pleasure. From place to place I have inserted a note supplying additional information about the Countess's activities which I have gleaned from other sources in the meantime. At the end, I have attached a postscript as well as a note from d'Avaux. If I had to read romances for long stretches at a time, I should find them tiresome; but I only read three or four pages in the mornings and evenings when I sit (by your leave) on my close-stool, and then it is neither fatiguing nor dull. – Liselotte in a letter to Sophie, 1 May 1704 JOURNAL ENTRY 17 AUGUST 1688 Dear reader, There is no way for me to guess whether this scrap of linen will, on purpose or through some calamity, be destroyed; or be made into a cushion; or, by some turn of events, fall under the scrutiny of some clever person and be decyphered, years or centuries from now. Though the fabric is new, clean, and dry as I sew these words into it, I cannot but expect that by the time anyone reads them, it will have become streaked with rain or tears, mottled and mildewed from age and damp, perhaps stained with smoke or blood. In any event I congratulate you, whoever you may be and in whatever era you may live, for having been clever enough to read this. Some would argue that a spy should not keep a written account of her actions lest it fall into the wrong hands. I would answer that it is my duty to find out detailed information, and supply it to my lord, and if I do not learn more than I can recite from memory, then I have not been very industrious. On 16 August 1688, I met Liselotte von der Pfalz, Elisabeth Charlotte, duchesse d'Orleans, who is known to the French Court as Madame or La Palatine, and to her loved ones in Germany as the Knight of the Rustling Leaves, at the gate of a stable on her estate at St. Cloud on the Seine, just downstream of Paris. She ordered her favorite hunting-horse brought out and saddled, while I went from stall to stall and selected a mount that would be suitable for riding bareback; that being the outward purpose of the expedition. Together we rode off into the woods that line the bank of the Seine for some miles in the neighborhood of the château. We were accompanied by two young men from Hanover. Liselotte maintains close relations with her family in that part of the world, and from time to time some nephew or cousin will be sent out to join her household for a time, and be 'finished' in the society of Versailles. The personal stories of these boys are not devoid of interest, but, reader, they do not pertain to my narration, and so I will tell you only that they were German Protestant heterosexuals, which meant that they could be trusted within the environment of St. Cloud, if only because they were utterly isolated. In a quiet backwater of the Seine, shielded from view by overhanging trees, a small flat-bottomed boat was waiting. I climbed aboard and burrowed under a tangle of fishing-nets. The boatman shoved off and poled the craft out into the main stream of the river, where we shortly made rendezvous with a larger vessel making its way upstream. I have been on it ever since. We have already passed up through the middle of Paris, keeping to the north side of the Île de la Cité. Just outside the city, at the confluence of the rivers Seine and Marne, we took the left fork, and began to travel up the latter. JOURNAL ENTRY 20 AUGUST 1688 For several days we have been working our languid way up the Marne. Yesterday we passed through Meaux, and (as I believed) left it many miles behind us, but today we came again close enough to hear its church-bells. This is because of the preposterous looping of the river, which turns in on itself like the arguments of Father Édouard de Gex. This vessel is what they call a chaland, a long, narrow, cheaply made box with but a single square sail that is hoisted whenever the wind happens to come from astern. But most of the time the mast is used only as a hitching-place for tow-ropes by which the chaland is pulled against the current by animals on the banks. My captain and protector is Monsieur LeBrun, who must live in mortal terror of Madame, for whenever I venture near the gunwale or do anything else the least bit dangerous he begins to sweat, and holds his head in his hands as if it were in danger of falling off. Mostly I sit on a keg of salt near the stern and watch France go by, and observe traffic on the river. I wear the clothes of a boy and keep my hair under my hat, which is sufficient to hide my sex from men on other boats and on the riverbank. If anyone hails me, I smile and say nothing, and after a few moments they falter and take me for an imbecile, perhaps a son of M. LeBrun who has been hit on the head. The lack of activity suits me, for I have been menstruating most of the time I've been on the chaland, and am in fact sitting on a pile of rags. It is obvious that this countryside produces abundant fodder. In a few weeks' time the barley will be ripe and then it will be easy to march an army through here. If an invasion of the Palatinate is being planned, the armies will come from the north (for they are stationed along the Dutch border) and the food will come from here; so there is nothing for a spy to look for, except, perhaps, shipments of certain military stocks. The armies would carry many of their own supplies with them, but it would not be unreasonable to expect that certain items, such as gunpowder, and especially lead, might be shipped up the river from arsenals in the vicinity of Paris. For to move a ton of lead in wagons requires teams of oxen, and many more wagon-loads of fodder, but to move the same cargo in the bilge of a chaland is easy. So I peer at the chalands making their way upriver and wonder what is stored down in their holds. To outward appearances they are all carrying the same sort of cargo as the chaland of M. LeBrun, viz. salted fish, salt, wine, apples, and other goods that originated closer to where the Seine empties into the sea. JOURNAL ENTRY 25 AUGUST 1688 Sitting still day after day has its advantages. I am trying to view my surroundings through the eye of a Natural Philosopher. A few days ago I was gazing at another chaland making its way up-stream about a quarter of a mile ahead of us. One of the boatmen needed to reach a lashing on the mast that was too high for him. So he gripped the rim of a large barrel that was standing upright on the deck, tipped it back towards himself, and rolled it over to where he wanted it, then climbed up onto its end. From the way he managed this huge object and from the sound that it made under his feet, I could tell that it must be empty. Nothing terribly unusual in and of itself, since empty barrels are commonly shipped from place to place. But it made me wonder whether there was any outward sign by which I could distinguish between a chaland loaded as M. LeBrun's is, and one that had a few tons of musket-balls in the bilge with empty barrels above to disguise the true nature of its cargo from spies? Even from a distance it is possible to observe the sideways rocking of one of these chalands by watching the top of its mast – for being long, the mast magnifies the small movements of the hull, and being high, it can be seen from far off. I borrowed a pair of wooden shoes from M. LeBrun and set both of them afloat in the stagnant water that has accumulated in the bilge. Into one of these, I placed an iron bar, which rested directly upon the sole of the shoe. Into the other, I packed an equal weight of salt, which had spilled out of a fractured barrel. Though the weights of the shoes' cargoes were equal, the distributions of those weights were not, for the salt was evenly distributed through the whole volume of the shoe, whereas the iron bar was concentrated in its 'bilge.' When I set the two shoes to rocking, I could easily observe that the one laden with iron rocked with a slower, more ponderous motion, because all of its weight was far from the axis of the movement. After re-uniting M. LeBrun with his shoes I returned to my position on the deck of the chaland, this time carrying a watch that had been given to me by Monsieur Huygens. First I timed one hundred rockings of the chaland I was on, and then I began to make the same observation of other chalands on the river. Most of them rocked at approximately the same frequency as the one of M. LeBrun. But I noticed one or two that rocked very slowly. Naturally I then began to scrutinize these chalands more carefully, whensoever they came into view, and familiarized myself with their general appearance and their crews. Somewhat to my disappointment, the first one turned out to be laden with quarried stones. Of course, no effort had been made to conceal the nature of its cargo. But later I saw one that had been filled up with barrels. M. LeBrun really does think I am an imbecile now, but it is of no concern as I shall not be with him for very much longer. JOURNAL ENTRY 28 AUGUST 1688 I have now passed all the way across Champagne and arrived at St.-Dizier, where the Marne comes very near the frontier of Lorraine and then turns southwards. I need to go east and north, so here is where I disembark. The journey has been slow, but I have seen things I would have overlooked if it had been more stimulating, and to sit in the sun on a slow boat in quiet country has hardly been a bad thing. No matter how strongly I hold to my convictions, I feel my resolve weakening after a few weeks at Court. For the people there are so wealthy, powerful, attractive, and cocksure that after a while it is impossible not to feel their influence. At first it induces a deviation too subtle to detect, but eventually one falls into orbit around the Sun King. The territory I have passed through is flat, and unlike western France, it is open, rather than being divided up into hedgerows and fences. Even without a map one can sense that a vast realm lies beyond to the north and east. The term 'fat of the land' is almost literal here, for the grain-fields are ripening before my eyes, like heavy cream rising up out of the very soil. As one born in a cold stony place, I think it looks like Paradise. But if I view it through the eyes of a man, a man of power, I see that it demands to be invaded. It is spread thick with the fodder and fuel of war, and war is bound to come across it in one direction or the other; so best have it go away from you at a time of your choosing than wait for it to darken the horizon and come sweeping towards you. Anyone can see that France will ever be invaded across these fields until she extends her border to the natural barrier of the Rhine. No border embedded in such a landscape will endure. Fortune has presented Louis with a choice: he can try to maintain his influence over England, which is a very uncertain endeavour and does not really add to the security of France, or he can march on the Rhine, take the Palatinate, and secure France against Germany forever. It seems obvious that this is the wiser course. But as a spy it is not my charge to advise Kings how they ought to rule, but to observe how they do. St.-Dizier, where I am about to disembark, is a river-port of modest size, with some very ancient churches and Roman ruins. The dark forest Argonne rises up behind it, and somewhere through those woods runs the border separating France from Lorraine. A few leagues farther to the east lies the vale of the river Meuse, which runs north into the Spanish Netherlands, and then becomes convolved with the shifting frontiers that separate Spanish, Dutch, and German states. Another ten leagues east of the Meuse lies the city of Nancy, which is on the river Moselle. That river likewise flows north, but it sweeps eastwards after skirting the Duchy of Luxembourg, and empties into the Rhine between Mainz and Cologne. Or at least that is what I recollect from gazing at the maps in the library at St. Cloud. I did not think it politic to take any of them with me! Continuing east beyond Nancy toward the Rhine, then, the maps depicted twenty or thirty leagues of jumbled and confused territory: an archipelago of small isolated counties and bishoprics, crumbs of land that belonged to the Holy Roman Empire until the Thirty Years' War. Eventually one reaches Strasbourg, which is on the Rhine. Louis XIV seized it some years ago. In some sense this event created me, for the plague and chaos of Strasbourg drew Jack there, and later the prospects of a fine barley-harvest and its inevitable result – war – drew him to Vienna where he met me. I wonder if I will complete the circle by journeying as far as Strasbourg now. If so, I shall complete another circle at the same time, for it was from that city that Liselotte crossed into France seventeen years ago to marry Monsieur, never to return to her homeland. JOURNAL ENTRY 30 AUGUST 1688 At St.-Dizier I changed back into the clothes of a gentlewoman and lodged at a convent. It is one of those convents where women of quality go to live out their lives after they've failed, or declined, to get married. In its ambience it is closer to a bordello than a nunnery. Many of the inmates are not even thirty years old, and never so lusty; when they cannot sneak men inside, they sneak out, and when they cannot sneak out, they practice on one another. Liselotte knew some of these girls when they were at Versailles and has continued to correspond with them. She sent letters ahead telling them that I was a sort of shirt-tail relative of hers, a member of her household, and that I was traveling to the Palatinate to pick up certain art-objects and family curios that Liselotte was supposed to have inherited upon the death of her brother, but which had been the subject of lengthy haggling and disputation with her half-siblings. Since it is inconceivable for a woman to undertake such a journey herself, I was to bide at the convent in St.-Dizier until my escort arrived: some minor nobleman of the Palatinate who would journey to this place with horses and a carriage to collect me, then convey me northeastwards across Lorraine, and the incomprehensible tangle of borders east of it, to Heidelberg. My identity and mission are false, but the escort is real – for needless to say, the people of the Palatinate are as eager to know their fate as their captive Queen, Liselotte. As of this writing my escort has not arrived, and no word has been heard of him. I am anxious that they have been detained or even killed, but for now there is nothing for me to do but go to Mass in the morning, sleep in the afternoon, and carouse with the nuns in the night-time. I was making polite conversation with the Mother Superior, a lovely woman of about threescore who turns a blind eye to the young women's comings and goings. She mentioned in passing that there are iron works nearby, and this caused me to doubt my own judgment concerning those slow-rolling chalands.Perhaps they were only carrying iron, and not lead. But later I went out on the town with some of the younger girls, and we passed within view of the river-front, where a chaland was being unloaded. Barrels were being rolled off and stacked along the quay, and heavy ox-carts were standing by waiting. I asked these girls if this was typical, but they affect complete ignorance of practical matters and were of no use at all. Later I claimed I was tired, and went to my allotted cell as if to sleep. But instead I changed into my boy-clothes and sneaked out of the convent using one of the well-worn escape-routes used by nuns going to trysts in the town. This time I was able to get much closer to the quay, and to observe the chaland from between two of the barrels that had been taken from it earlier. And indeed I saw small but massive objects being lifted up out of its bilge and loaded onto those ox-carts. Overseeing the work was a man whose face I could not see, but of whom much could be guessed from his clothing. About his boots were certain nuances that I had begun to notice in the boots of Monsieur's lovers shortly before my departure from St. Cloud. His breeches – No. By the time anyone reads these words, fashions will have changed, and so it would be a waste of time for me to enumerate the details – suffice it to say that everything he wore had to have been sewn in Paris within the last month. My observations were cut short by the clumsiness of a few Vagabonds who had crept down to the quay hoping to pilfer something. One of them leaned against a barrel, assuming it was full and would support his weight, but being empty it tilted away from him and then, when he sprang back, came down with a hollow boom. Instantly the courtier whipped out his sword and pointed it at me, for he had spied me peering at him between barrels, and several men came running towards me. The Vagabonds took off at a run and I followed them, reasoning that they would know better than I how to disappear into this town. And indeed by vaulting over certain walls and crawling down certain gutters they very nearly disappeared from me, who was but a few paces behind them. Eventually I followed them as far as a church-yard, where they had set up a little squat in a tangle of vines growing up the side of an ancient mausoleum. They made no effort either to welcome me or to chase me away, and so I hunkered down in the darkness a few paces off, and listened to them mutter. Much of their zargon was incomprehensible, but I could discern that there were four of them. Three seemed to be making excuses, as if resigned to whatever fate awaited them. But the fourth was frustrated, he had the energy to be critical of the others, and to desire some improvement in their situation. When this one got up and stepped aside for a piss, I rose and drew a little closer to him and said, 'Meet me alone at the corner of the convent where the ivy grows,' and then I darted away, not knowing whether he might try to seize me. An hour later I was able to observe him from the parapet of the convent. I threw him a coin and told him that he would receive ten more of the same if he would follow the ox-carts, observe their movements, and report back to me in three days. He receded into the darkness without saying a word. The next morning the Mother Superior delivered a letter to one of the girls, explaining that it had been left at the gate the night before. The recipient took one look at the seal and exclaimed, 'Oh, it is from my dear cousin!' She opened it with a jerk and read it then and there, pronouncing half the words aloud, as she was barely literate. The import seemed to be that her cousin had passed through St.-Dizier the night before but very much regretted he'd not been able to stop in for a visit, as his errand was very pressing; however, he expected to be in the area for some time, and hoped that he would have the opportunity to see her soon. When she pulled the letter open, the disc of wax sealing it shut popped off and rolled across the floor under a chair. As she was reading the letter I went over and picked it up. The coat of arms pressed into that seal was one I did not fully recognize, but certain elements were familiar to me from my time at Versailles – I could guess that he was related to a certain noble family of Gascony, well known for its military exploits. It seemed safe to assume he was the gentleman I'd spied on the quay the night before. JOURNAL ENTRY 2 SEPTEMBER 1688 CRYPTANALYST'S NOTE : In the original, the section below contains considerable detail about the cargoes being unloaded from the chalands at St.-Dizier, and the coats of arms and insignias of persons that the Countess observed there, all of which were no doubt of greater interest to the Prince of Orange than they can be to your majesty. I have elided them.: B.R. A slow three days at the convent of St.-Dizier have given me more than enough time to catch up on my embroidery! With any luck my Vagabond will come back tonight with news. If I have received no word from the Palatinate by tomorrow I shall have little choice but to strike out on my own, though I have no idea how to manage it. I have tried to make what use I could of this fallow time, as I did on the chaland.During the days I have tried to make conversation with Eloise, the girl who received the letter. This has been difficult because she is not very intelligent and we have few interests in common. I let it be known that I have been at Versailles and St. Cloud recently. In time, word reached her of this, and she began to sit near me at meals, and to ask if I knew this or that person there, and what had become of so-and-so. So at last I have learned who she is, and who her well-dressed cousin is: the Chevalier d'Adour, who has devoted his last several years to currying favor with Maréchal Louvois, the King's commander-in-chief. He distinguished himself in the recent massacres of Protestants in the Piedmont and, in sum, is the sort who might be entrusted with a mission of some importance. In the evenings I have tried to keep an eye on the river-front. Several more chalands have been unloaded there, in the same style as the first. JOURNAL ENTRY 5 SEPTEMBER 1688 Suddenly so much happened I could not tend to my embroidery for a few days. I am catching up on it now, in a carriage on a bumpy road in the Argonne. This type of writing has more advantages to a peripatetic spy than I appreciated at first. It would be impossible for me to write with pen and ink here. But needlework I can just manage. To say it quickly, my young Vagabond came back and earned his ten silver pieces by informing me that the heavy ox-carts carrying the cargo from the chalands were being driven east, out of France and into Lorraine, circumventing Toul and Nancy on forest tracks, and then continuing east to Alsace, which is France again (the Duchy of Lorraine being flanked by France to both east and west). My Vagabond had been forced, for lack of time, to turn round and come back before he could follow the carts all the way to their destination, but it is obvious enough that they are bound towards the Rhine. He heard from a wanderer he met on the road that such carts were converging from more than one direction on the fortress of Haguenau, which lately had been a loud and smoky place. This man had fled the area because the troops had been press-ganging any idlers they could find, putting them to work chopping down trees – little ones for firewood and big ones for lumber. Even the shacks of the Vagabonds were being chopped up and burnt. After hearing this news I did not sleep for the rest of the night. If my recollection of the maps was right, Haguenau is on a tributary of the Rhine, and is part of the barrière de fer that Vauban built to protect France from the Germans, Dutch, Spanish, and other foes. Supposing that I was right in thinking that the cargo was lead; then the meaning of what I'd just been told was that it was being melted down at Haguenau and made into musket- and cannon-balls. This would explain the demand for firewood. But why did they also require lumber? I guessed it was to build barges that could carry the ammunition down to the Rhine. The current would then take them downstream into the Palatinate in a day or two. Certain things I had noticed at Court now became imbued with new meanings. The Chevalier de Lorraine – lord of the lands over which the ox-carts passed en route to Haguenau – has long been the most senior of Monsieur's lovers, and the most cruel and implacable of Madame's tormentors. In theory he is a vassal of the Holy Roman Emperor, of which Lorraine is still a tributary state, but in practice he has become completely surrounded by France – one cannot enter or leave Lorraine without traveling over territory that is ruled from Versailles. This explains why he spends all his time in the French Court instead of Vienna. Conventional wisdom has it that the duc d'Orleans was raised to be effeminate and passive so that he would never pose a threat to his older brother's kingship. One might suppose that the Chevalier de Lorraine, who routinely penetrates Monsieur, and who rules his affections, has thereby exploited a vulnerability in the ruling dynasty of France. That, again, is the conventional wisdom at Court. But now I was seeing it in a different light. One cannot penetrate without being encompassed, and the Chevalier de Lorraine is encompassed by Monsieur just as his territory has been encompassed by France. Louis invades and penetrates, his brother seduces and surrounds, they share a common will, they complement each other as brothers should. I see a homosexual who makes a sham marriage and spurns his wife for the love of a man. But Louis sees a brother who will fight a sham war in the Palatinate, supposedly to defend his wife's claim on that territory, while using his lover's fiefdom as a highway to transport matériel to the front. When these three – Monsieur, Madame, and the Chevalier – were packed off to St. Cloud on short notice a few weeks ago, I assumed it was because the King had grown sick of their squabbling. But now I perceive that the King thinks in metaphors, and that he had to put them all together, like animals in a baiting-ring, to bring their conflict to a head, before undertaking his military campaign. Just as the domestic squabbles of Jupiter and Juno were thought by the Romans to be manifested in thunderstorms, so the squalid triangle of St. Cloud will be manifested as war in the Palatinate. Louis' empire, which now is interrupted in the Argonne, will be extended across and down the Rhine, as far as Mannheim and Heidelberg, and when domestic tranquillity is finally restored to St. Cloud, France will be two hundred miles wider, and the barrière de fer will run across burnt territory where German-speaking Protestants used to dwell. All of this came together in my head in an instant, but then I lay awake until dawn fretting over what I should do. Weeks before, I had made up a little metaphor of my own, concerning two dogs named Phobos and Deimos, and put it in a letter to d'Avaux in the hopes that the Prince of Orange's spies would read it, and understand its message. At the time I'd thought myself very clever. But now my metaphor seemed childish and inane compared to that of Louis. Worse, its message was ambiguous – for its entire point was that I could not be sure, yet, whether Louvois intended to attack northwards into the Dutch Republic, or draw back, wheel round to the east, and launch himself across the Rhine. Now I felt sure I knew the answer, and needed to get word to the Prince of Orange. But I was stuck in a convent in St.-Dizier and had nothing to base my report on, save Vagabond hearsay, as well as a conviction in my own mind that I had understood the mentality of the King. And even this might evaporate like dew in a few hours, as the fears of the night-time so often do in the morning. I was on the verge of becoming a Vagabond myself, and striking out on the eastern road, when a spattered and dusty carriage pulled up in front of the convent, just before morning Mass, and a gentleman knocked on the door and asked for me under the false name I'd adopted. That gentleman and I were on our way as soon as his team could be fed and watered. He is Dr. Ernst von Pfung, a long-suffering gentleman scholar of Heidelberg. When he was a boy, his homeland was occupied and ravaged by the Emperor's armies; at the end of the Thirty Years' War, when the Palatinate was handed over to the Winter Queen in the peace settlement, his family helped them establish their royal household in what remained of Heidelberg Castle. So he has known Sophie and her siblings for a long time. He got all of his education, including a doctorate of jurisprudence, at Heidelberg. He served as an advisor to Charles Louis (the brother of Sophie, and father of Liselotte) when he was Elector Palatinate, and later tried to exert some sort of steadying influence on Liselotte's elder brother Charles when he succeeded to the Electoral throne. But this Charles was daft, and only wanted to conduct mock-sieges at his Rhine castles, using rabble like Jack as his 'soldiers.' At one of these, he caught a fever and died, precipitating the succession dispute on which the King of France now hopes to capitalize. Dr. von Pfung, whose earliest and worst memories are of Catholic armies burning, raping, and pillaging his homeland, is beside himself with worry that the same thing is about to happen all over again, this time with French instead of Imperial troops. The events of the last few days have done nothing to reassure him. Between Heidelberg and the Duchy of Luxembourg, the Holy Roman Empire forms a hundred-mile-wide salient that protrudes southwards into France, almost as far as the River Moselle. It is called the Saarland and Dr. von Pfung, as a petty noble of the Empire, is accustomed to being able to travel across it freely and safely. As it gets closer to Lorraine, this territory becomes fragmented into tiny principalities. By threading his way between them Dr. von Pfung had intended to make safe passage to Lorraine, which is technically part of the Empire. A brief transit across Lorraine would have brought him across the French border very close to St.-Dizier. Fortunately Dr. von Pfung has the wisdom and foresight one would expect in a man of his maturity and erudition. He had not simply assumed that his plan would work out, but had sent riders out a few days in advance to scout the territory. When they had not returned, he had set out anyway, hoping for the best; but very shortly he had met one of them on the road, returning with gloomy tidings. Certain obstacles had been discovered, of a complicated nature that Dr. von Pfung declined to explain. He had ordered a volte-face and ridden south down the east bank of the Rhine as far as the city of Strasbourg, where he had crossed over into Alsace, and from there he made his way as fast as he could. As a gentleman he is entitled to bear arms, and he has not been slow to take advantage of that right, for in addition to the rapier on his hip he has a pair of pistols and a musket inside the carriage. We are accompanied by two out-riders: young gentlemen similarly armed. At every inn and river-crossing they have had to force their way through by bluff and bluster, and the strain is showing on Dr. von Pfung's face; after we left the precincts of St.-Dizier he very courteously excused himself, removed his wig to reveal a bald pate fringed with gray, leaned back next to an open window, and rested his eyes for a quarter of an hour. The journey has left him suspecting much but knowing nothing, which puts him in the same predicament as I. When he had revived, I put a suggestion to him: 'I hope you will not think me forward, Doctor, but it seems to me that vast consequences balance on the intelligence that we collect, or fail to, in the next days. You and I have each used all the craft and wit that we could muster, and only skirted the matter. Could it be that we must now relax our grip on Subtlety, and fling our arms around Courage, and strike for the heart of this thing?' Contrary to what I had expected, these words eased and softened the face of Dr. von Pfung. He smiled, revealing a finely carven set of teeth, and nodded once, in a sort of bow. 'I had already resolved to gamble my life on it,' he admitted. 'If I have seemed nervous or distracted to you, it is because I could not see my way clear to risking yours as well. And it makes me uneasy still, for you have much more life ahead of you than I do. But – ' 'Say no more, we must not waste our energies on this sort of idle talk,' I said. 'It is decided – we'll roll the dice. What of your escorts?' 'Those young men are officers of a cavalry regiment – probably the first to be cut down when Louvois invades. They are men of honor.' 'Your driver?' 'He has been in the service of my family his whole life and would never permit me to journey, or to die, alone.' 'Then I propose we strike out for the Meuse, which ought to lie two or three days' hard riding east of here, on the far side of the forest Argonne.' As quickly as that, Dr. von Pfung rapped on the ceiling and instructed the driver to keep the sun on his right hand through most of the coming day. The driver naturally fell onto those eastward roads that seemed most heavily traveled, and so we ended up following the deep wheel-ruts that had been scored across the ground by the heavy ox-carts in preceding days. We'd not been on the road for more than a few hours before we overtook a whole train of them, laboring up a long grade between the valleys of the Marne and the Ornain. By taking advantage of occasional wide places in the road, our driver was able to pass these carts one at a time. Peering out through the carriage windows, Dr. von Pfung and I could now plainly see that the carts were laden with pigs of a gray metal that might have been iron – but as there was not a speck of rust on any of them, they must have been lead. Reader, I hope you will not think me silly and girlish if I confess that I was pleased and excited to see my suspicions borne out and my cleverness proven at last. But a glance at the face of Dr. von Pfung crushed any such emotions, for he looked like a man who has returned home in the night-time to discover flames and smoke billowing from the windows of his own house. At the head of the train rode a French cavalry officer, looking as if he had just been condemned to serve a hundred-year stint in Purgatory. He made no effort to hail us and so we quickly left him and his column far to the rear. But our hopes of making up for lost time were quashed by the nature of the terrain. The Argonne is a broad ridge running from north to south, directly across our path, and in many places the ground drops away into deep river-courses. Where the terrain is level, it is densely forested. So one has no choice but to follow the roads and to make use of the fords and bridges provided, be they never so congested and tumbledown. But the sight of that miserable young officer had given me an idea. I asked Dr. von Pfung to close his eyes, and made him promise not to peek. This intimidated him to such a degree that he simply climbed down out of the carriage and walked alongside it for a while. I changed out of the drab habit of the nunnery and into a dress I had brought along. At Versailles this garment would scarce have been fit to mop the floor with. Here in the Argonne Forest, though, it rated as a significant Fire Hazard. A few hours later, as we descended into the valley of a smaller river called the Ornain, we overtook another train of lead-bearing ox-carts, which was picking its way down the grade with an infinity of cursing, collisions, and splintering wood. Just as before, there was a young officer riding at the head. He looked every bit as miserable as the first one – until I popped out of the carriage window, and almost out of my dress. Once he got over his astonishment, he almost wept with gratitude. It made me happy to give this poor man such pleasure, and by nothing more than putting on a dress and opening a window. His mouth fell open in a way that reminded me of a fish; so I resolved to go fishing. 'Excuse me, Monsieur, but can you tell me where I might find my uncle?' At this his mouth opened a little wider, and his face reddened. 'Mademoiselle, I am ever so sorry, but I do not know him.' 'That is impossible! Every officer knows him!' I tried. 'Pardon me, Mademoiselle, but you have mistaken my meaning. No doubt, your uncle is a great man whose name I would recognize, and honor, if I heard it – but I am too foolish and ignorant to know who you are, and consequently I do not know which great man has the privilege of being your uncle.' 'I thought you would know who I was!' I pouted. The officer looked extremely dismayed. 'I am – ' Then I turned around and slapped Dr. von Pfung lightly on the arm. 'Stop it!' Then, to the officer: 'My chaperone is an old fart who will not allow me to introduce myself.' 'Indeed, Mademoiselle, for a young lady to introduce herself to a young man would be unpardonable.' 'Then we shall have to conduct our conversation incognito, and say it never happened – as if it were a lovers' tryst,' I said, leaning a bit farther out the window, and beckoning him to ride a little closer. I was afraid he would swoon and get himself wrapped around the axle of our carriage. He maintained his balance with some effort, though, and drew so close that I was able to reach out and steady myself by putting my hand on the pommel of his saber. In a lower voice I continued: 'You have probably guessed that my uncle is a man of very high rank who has been sent out to these parts to execute the will of the King, in coming days.' The officer nodded. 'I was on my way up from Oyonnax, returning to Paris, when I learned he was in these parts, and I have decided to find his camp and pay him a surprise visit, and neither you nor my chaperone nor anyone else can prevent it! I just need to know where to find his headquarters.' 'Mademoiselle, is your uncle the Chevalier d'Adour?' I adopted the look of one who has been gagged with the handle of a spoon. 'Of course not, I didn't really think so . . . neither are you of the House of Lorraine, I gather, or you would not need directions . . . is it Étienne d'Arcachon? No, forgive me, he has no siblings and could not have a niece. But I see from the softening of your beautiful face, Mademoiselle, that I am drawing nearer the truth. The only one in these parts who is above the young Arcachon in rank is the Maréchal de Louvois himself. And I do not know whether he has yet come south from the Dutch front . . . but when he does, you may look for him along the banks of the Meuse. Provided, that if you ask for him there, and learn that he has already disembarked, you will have to follow his track eastwards into the Saarland.' That conversation occurred the day before yesterday, and we have done nothing since then but toil eastwards through the woods. It has had the air of a funeral procession, for as soon as Dr. von Pfung heard the name of Louvois, all doubt vanished that the Palatinate was to be invaded. But the officer who uttered that name might have been guessing, or passing on a baseless rumor, or telling me what he thought I wanted to hear. We must see this thing through and view incontrovertible evidence with our own eyes. As I write this we are descending another long tedious grade into what must be the valley of the Meuse. From here that river flows up through the Ardennes and across the Spanish Netherlands into the territory along the Dutch border where the best regiments of the French Army have long been encamped to menace William's flank and pin down the Dutch Army. CRYPTANALYST'S NOTE : At this point the account becomes badly disjointed. The countess blundered into the midst of your majesty's army and had an adventure, which she did not have the leisure to write down. Later, as she was fleeing north in the direction of Nijmegen, she made a few cryptic notes as to what had happened. These are intermingled with more lengthy espionage reports listing the regiments and officers she observed moving south to join your majesty's forces along the Rhine. I have been able to reconstruct the Countess's actions, and thereby to make some sense of her notes, by interviewing several of the persons who saw her in the French camp. The narrative that follows is incomparably more discursive than what appears in her needlework but I believe that it is accurate, and I hope that it will be more informative, and therefore more pleasing, to your majesty than the original. At the same time, I have removed all of the Countess's tedious lists of battalions, et cetera.: B.R. JOURNAL ENTRY 7 SEPTEMBER 1688 I am riding north post-haste and can only jot down a few words during pauses to change horses. The carriage is lost. The driver and Dr. von Pfung are dead. I am traveling with the two cavalrymen from Heidelberg. As I write these words we are in a village beside the Meuse, near Verdun I believe. Now I'm told we must ride again. It is later, and I think we are near where France, the Duchy of Luxembourg, and the Spanish Netherlands come together. We have had to strike up away from the Meuse and into the forest. Between here and Liège, which lies some hundred miles to the north, the river does not run in a direct line, but makes a lengthy excursion to westward, running for much of the way through French lands. This makes it perfectly suited to serve as a conduit for French military traffic from the north, but bad for us. Instead we shall attempt to traverse the Ardennes (as these woods are called) northwards. JOURNAL ENTRY 8 SEPTEMBER 1688 Catching our breath and rubbing our saddle-sores along a riverbank while Hans looks for a ford. Will try to explain as I go along. When we at last reached the Meuse, three days ago (had to count on my fingers, as it seems nearer three weeks!), we immediately saw the evidence we had been looking for. Thousands of ancient trees felled, valley full of smoke, landing-stages improvised on the riverbank. Vanguards of the regiments from the Dutch front had come upriver, made rendezvous with officers sent out from Versailles, and begun preparations to receive the regiments themselves. For many hours Dr. von Pfung did not say a word. When he did, only slurred meaningless sounds came from his mouth, and I understood that he had suffered a stroke. I asked him if he wanted to turn back and he only shook his head no, pointed to me, and then pointed north. Everything had fallen apart. Until that moment I had presumed that we were operating according to some coherent plan of Dr. von Pfung's, but now in retrospect I understood that we had been plunging into danger heedlessly, like a man carried into a battlefield by a wild horse. I could not think at all for a while. I am ashamed to report that because of this failure we blundered into the camp of a cavalry regiment. A captain rapped on the door of the carriage and demanded that we explain ourselves. It was already obvious to them that most of our party were German-speaking, and it would not take long for them to understand that Dr. von Pfung and the others were of the Palatinate; this would mark us as enemy spies and lead to the worst imaginable consequences. During my long journey up the Marne on the chaland I had had plenty of time to imagine bad outcomes, and had concocted and rehearsed several false stories to tell my captors in the event I should be caught spying. But looking into the face of that captain, I was no more able to tell tales than the stricken Dr. von Pfung. The problem lay in that this operation was on a much vaster scale than either Liselotte or I had imagined, and many more people of Court rank were involved; for all I knew, some Count or Marquis might be nearby, with whom I had dined or danced at Versailles, and who would recognize me the moment I got out of the carriage. To adopt some made-up name and elaborate some tale would amount to confessing that I was a spy. So I told the truth. 'Do not look to this man to make introductions, for he has suffered a stroke, and lost the faculty of speech,' I said to the astonished captain. 'I am Eliza, Countess de la Zeur, and I am here in the service of Elisabeth Charlotte, the Duchess of Orleans and rightful inheritor of the Palatinate. It is in her name you are about to invade that land. It is she whom my escorts serve, for they are Court officials of Heidelberg. And it is she who has sent me here, as her personal representative, to look into your operations and ensure that the right thing is done.' This bit of nonsense, 'that the right thing is done,' was a list of dead words I tacked on to the end of the sentence because I did not know what to say, and was losing my nerve. For even when I stood beneath the Emperor's palace in Vienna, waiting to feel the blade of a Janissary's scimitar biting into my neck, I had not felt so uncertain as I did there. But I think the very vagueness of my words had a great effect on this captain, for he stepped back from the window and bowed deeply, and proclaimed that he would send word of my arrival to his superiors without delay. Hans has come back saying he has found a place where we may attempt to ford this river and so I will only narrate that in due course, word of our arrival was passed up the chain of command until it reached a man whose rank at Court was high enough that he could entertain me without violating any rules of precedence. That man turned out to be Étienne d'Arcachon. JOURNAL ENTRY 10 SEPTEMBER 1688 They think we are somewhere around Bastogne. Have been unable to do needlework for some while as our day-to-day affairs have pressed in on us sorely. The Ardennes Forest is crowded with Vagabonds and highwaymen (and, some say, witches and goblins) at the best of times. To these have now been added a large number of deserters from the French regiments that are being moved southwards. They jump off the slow-moving barges and wade to the bank and infiltrate the forest. We have had to move carefully and to post watches all night long. I am making these notes on my watch. To sit by a crackling fire would be folly and so I am perched up in the fork of a tree, wrapped up in blankets, sewing by moonlight. Men who have weathered terrible trials are wont to have dull and useless children to demonstrate their power, as rich Arabs grow their fingernails long. So with the duc d'Arcachon and his only legitimate son, Étienne. The Duke survived the bad dream of the Fronde Rebellion and built a navy for the King. Étienne has chosen a career in the Army; this is his notion of youthful rebellion. It is said of some men that 'he would cut off his right arm before doing thus-and-such.' Of Étienne, it used to be said that he would sacrifice a limb before violating the smallest rule of etiquette. But now people say, rather, that he actually did cut off his right arm out of politeness, for several years ago something happened at a party to that general effect – accounts vary, for I get the impression it was in some way disgraceful to his family. At any rate the details are unknown to me, but the tale rings true. He has become a great patron of woodcarvers and silversmiths, whom he pays to make artificial hands for him. Some of them are shockingly lifelike. The hand he extended to help me down out of the carriage was carved of ivory with fingernails fashioned from mother-of-pearl. When we dined on roast grouse in his quarters, he had switched to a hand of carven ebony, permanently gripping a serrated knife, which he used to cut his meat, though it looked as if it would have made an excellent weapon, too! And after dinner, when he undertook to seduce me, he wore a special hand carved out of jade, with an extremely oversized middle finger. That digit was, in fact, a perfect reproduction of a man's erect phallus. As such it was nothing I had not already seen in various private 'art' collections in and around Versailles, for lords, and even ladies, love to have such things in their private chambers, as proof of their sophistication, and many of their rooms are veritable Shrines to the god Priapus. But I was caught unawares by a hidden feature of this hand: it must have been hollow, and stuffed with clockwork, for when Étienne d'Arcachon tripped a hidden lever, it suddenly came alive, and began to hum and buzz like a hornet in a bottle. Inside, it seemed, was a coil spring that had been tightly wound in advance. I need hardly tell you, reader, that events of the past few days had left me rather tightly wound myself, and I can assure you that the tension was gone from my body long before it was gone from the spring. You may despise me for having reveled in fleshly pleasure while Dr. von Pfung was laid out with a stroke, but to have been pent up in a stifling carriage with a dying man for all that time had left me with a ravening to partake of life. I closed my eyes at the moment of climax and fell back onto the bed, exhausting my lungs in a long cry, and feeling all tension drain from my body. Étienne executed some deft maneuver of which I was scarcely aware. When I opened my eyes, I found that the jade phallus had been withdrawn and replaced by a real one, that of Étienne d'Arcachon. Again, you may well doubt my judgment in allowing myself to be taken in this way. That is your prerogative. Indeed, to marry such a man would be a grievous error. But in looking for a lover, one could do worse than a man who is clean, extremely polite, and has a madly vibrating jade phallus for a right forefinger. The warmth of his trunk felt good against my thighs; it did not occur to me to object; before I could really consider my situation, I realized that he was already climaxing inside of me. JOURNAL ENTRY 12 SEPTEMBER 1688 Still in the damnable Ardennes, creeping northwards, pausing from time to time to observe the movements of the French battalions. These woods cannot possibly go on much farther. At least we have grown accustomed to the territory now, and know how to make our way. But at times we seem to move no faster than mice chewing their way through wood. When I woke up in the bed of Étienne d'Arcachon the next morning, he had, in typical fashion, already left; but somewhat less typically, he had written me a love-poem and left it on the bedside table. Some ladies boast of ancient pedigrees And prate about their ancestors a lot But cankers flourish on old family trees Whose mossy trunks do oft conceal rot. My lady's blood runs pure as mountain streams So I don't care if her high rank was bought Her beauty lends fresh vigor to my dreams Of children free of blemish and of blot. His quarters was a little château on the east bank of the Meuse. Out the window I could see Belgian river-boats – variously leased, borrowed, bought, or commandeered – coming upstream, their decks crowded with French soldiers. I dressed and went downstairs to find Dr. von Pfung's carriage-driver waiting for me. The night before, I had explained my friend's plight to Étienne d'Arcachon, who had made arrangements for his own personal physician to administer treatment. Having personally witnessed the violence inflicted upon no less a personage than the King of France himself by the Royal Physician, I had assented to this with some ambivalence. Indeed, Dr. von Pfung's driver now informed me that the poor man had been bled twice during the night and was now very weak. He had signalled his desire to return to the Palatinate without delay, in hopes that he might look upon Heidelberg Castle one last time before he went to his long home. The driver and I both understood that this would be impossible. According to the tale I had told my host, we were there as forward observers representing Liselotte. If that were true, we should either stay with the main body, or retire westwards towards St. Cloud – never run ahead of the invasion force. Yet Dr. von Pfung wanted to do just that, whereas I needed to strike out for the north and inform the Prince of Orange that his southern flank was soon to be free of French troops. And so we devised a plan, which was that our little group would leave that day on the pretext of taking Dr. von Pfung back to the west, but that when conditions were right, the carriage would break eastwards towards Heidelberg while I would go north accompanied by the two cavalrymen (who have imposing names and titles but whom I now call by their Christian names, Hans and Joachim). When eyebrows were raised about this later, as seemed more than likely, I would claim that the others had turned out to be Protestant spies, working for William of Orange, and that I had been borne along against my will. The plan unfolded correctly at first; we crossed the Meuse again as if going back into the west, but then began to make our way northwards up the bank, fighting against an increasing stream of south-bound military traffic. For since the boats were coming up against the river's current, most of them were drawn by teams of animals on the banks. After we had traveled north for about half a day we came to a ferry, where we resolved to part ways. I went into the carriage and kissed Dr. von Pfung and said some words to him – though all words, especially ones improvised in haste, seemed inadequate, and the doctor managed to say more with his eyes and his one good hand than I did with my entire faculties. I changed once again into a man's clothes, hoping to pass myself off as a page to Hans and Joachim, and mounted a pony we'd borrowed from the stables of Étienne d'Arcachon. After some haggling with the ferryman – who was loath to venture across through the regimental traffic – the carriage was driven onto the ferry, its wheels were chocked, the horses hobbled, and the short voyage across the Meuse began. They had almost reached the eastern bank when they were hailed by a French officer on one of the south-bound vessels. He had perceived, through his spyglass, Dr. von Pfung's coat of arms painted on the door of the carriage, and recognized him as coming from the Palatinate. Now, the driver had a letter from Étienne d'Arcachon giving him permission to travel west:but he had now been observed crossing the Meuse eastwards.His only hope was therefore to make a run for it. That is what he attempted to do when the ferry reached the east bank. The only available road ran parallel to the bank for some distance before turning away from the river into a village. He therefore had to drive along in full view of all the boats crowding the river, whose decks were thronged with French musketeers. Some of the boats were armed with swivel-guns as well. By this time a hue and cry had gone up among the boats, and there was plenty of time for them to load their guns as the carriage disembarked from the ferry. The officer had traded his spyglass for a saber, which he raised high, then brought down as a signal. Instantly, the French boats were completely obscured in clouds of powder-smoke. The valley of the Meuse was filled with flocks of birds that erupted from the trees, startled by the sound of the guns. The carriage was reduced to splinters, the horses torn apart, and the fates of the brave driver and his stricken passenger perfectly obvious. I could have tarried on the spot and wept for a long time, but on this bank were several locals who had seen us arrive in the company of the carriage, and it would not be long before one of them sold that intelligence to the Frenchmen on the river. So we struck out for the north, beginning the journey that continues even as I write these words. JOURNAL ENTRY 13 SEPTEMBER 1688 The peasants around here say that the lord of the manor is a Bishop. This gives me hope that we are now in the Bishopric of Liège, not terribly far from one of the outlying tendrils of the Dutch Republic. Hans and Joachim have been having a long discussion in German, which I understand but meagerly. One thinks he ought to strike out alone to the East, go to the Rhine, and then double back to the South and warn the Palatinate. The other fears it is too late; there is nothing they can do now for their homeland; it is better to seek revenge by throwing all of their energies behind the Protestant Defender. Later. The dispute was resolved as follows: we shall ride north past French lines to Maestricht and take passage on a canal-boat down the river to Nijmegen, where the Meuse and the Rhine almost kiss each other. That is some hundred miles north of here, yet it may be a quicker way to reach the Rhine than to cut east cross-country through God knows what perils and complications. In Nijmegen, Hans and Joachim can get the latest news from passengers and boatmen who have lately come down the Rhine from Heidelberg and Mannheim. It did not take long, once we left our camp near Liège, to pass out of the zone of French military control. We rode over an area of torn-up ground that, until a few days ago, was the permanent camp of a French regiment. Ahead of us are a few French companies left along the border as a façade. They stop and interrogate travelers trying to come in, but ignore those like us who are only trying to pass out towards Maestricht. JOURNAL ENTRY 15 SEPTEMBER 1688 On a canal-boat bound from Maestricht to Nijmegen. Conditions not very comfortable, but at least we do not have to ride or walk any more. Am renewing my acquaintance with soap. JOURNAL ENTRY 16 SEPTEMBER 1688 I am in a cabin of a canal-ship making its way west across the Dutch Republic. I am surrounded by slumbering Princesses. The Germans have a fondness for faery-tales, or Märchen as they call them, that is strangely at odds with their orderly dispositions. Ranged in parallel with their tidy Christian world is the Märchenwelt , a pagan realm of romance, wonders, and magical beings. Why they believe in the Märchenwelt has ever been a mystery to me; but I am closer to understanding it today than I was yesterday. For yesterday we reached Nijmegen. We went direct to the bank of the Rhine and I began looking for a canal-boat bound in the direction of Rotterdam and the Hague. Hans and Joachim meanwhile canvassed travelers debarking from boats lately come from upstream. I had no sooner settled myself in a comfortable cabin on a Hague-bound canal-ship when Joachim found me; and he had in tow a pair of characters straight out of the Märchenwelt.They were not gnomes, dwarves, or witches, but Princesses: one full-grown (I believe she is not yet thirty) and one pint-sized (she has told me three different times that she is five years old). True to form, the little one carries a doll that she insists is also a princess. They do not look like princesses. The mother, whose name is Eleanor, has something of a regal bearing. But this was not obvious to me at first, for when they joined me, and Eleanor noticed a clean bed (mine) and saw that Caroline – for that is the daughter's name – was under my watch, she fell immediately into (my) bed, went to sleep, and did not awaken for some hours, by which time the boat was well underway. I spent much of that time chatting with little Caroline, who was at pains to let me know she was a princess; but as she made the same claim of the dirty lump of stuffed rags she bore around in her arms, I did not pay it much mind. But Joachim insisted that the disheveled woman snoring under my blankets was genuine royalty. I was about to chide him for having been deluded by mountebanks, when I began to recollect the tales I had been told of the Winter Queen, who after being driven out of Bohemia by the Pope's legions, wandered about Europe as a Vagabond before finding safe haven at the Hague. And my time at Versailles taught me more than I wished to know about the desperate financial straits in which many nobles and royals live their whole lives. Was it really so unthinkable that three Princesses – mother, daughter, and doll – should be wandering about lost and hungry on the Nijmegen riverfront? For war had come to this part of the world, and war rends the veil that separates the everyday world from the Märchenwelt. By the time Eleanor woke up, I had mended the doll, and I had been looking after little Caroline for long enough that I felt responsible for her, and would have been willing to snatch her away from Eleanor if the latter had proved, upon awakening, to be some sort of madwoman (this is by no means my usual response to small children, for at Versailles, playing my role as governess, I had been put in charge of many a little snot-nose whose names I have long since forgotten. But Caroline was bright, and interesting to talk to, and a welcome relief from the sorts of people I had been spending time with for the last several weeks). When Eleanor had arisen, and washed, and eaten some of my provisions, she told a story that was wild but, by modern standards, plausible. She claims to be the daughter of the Duke of Saxe-Eisenach. She married the Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach. The daughter is properly called Princess Wilhelmina Caroline of Ansbach. But this Margrave died of smallpox a few years ago and his title passed to a son by an earlier wife, who had always considered Eleanor to be a sort of wicked stepmother (this being a Märchen, after all) and so cast her and little Caroline out of the Schlob.They drifted back to Eisenach, Eleanor's place of birth. This is a place on the edge of the Thüringer Wald, perhaps two hundred miles east of where we are now. Her position in the world at that time, a few years ago, was the reverse of mine: she had a lofty title, but no property at all. Whereas I had no titles other than Slave and Vagabond, but I did have some money. At any rate, she and Caroline were suffered to dwell in what sounds like a family hunting-lodge in the Thüringer Wald. But she does not seem to have been much more welcome in Eisenach than she had been at Ansbach following the death of her husband. And so, while spending part of each year at Eisenach, it has been her practice to roam about and pay extended visits to shirttail relatives all over northern Europe, moving from time to time lest she wear out her welcome in any one place. Recently she paid a brief visit to Ansbach in an effort to patch things up with her hostile stepson. Ansbach is within striking distance of Mannheim on the Rhine, and so she and Caroline next went there to look in on some cousins who had shown them charity in the past. They arrived, naturally, at the worst possible moment, a few days ago, just as the French regiments were swarming over the Rhine on the barges built at Haguenau, and bombarding the defensive works. Someone there had the presence of mind to pack them on a boat full of well-heeled refugees, bound down the river. And so they passed quickly out of the area of danger, though they continued to hear cannon-fire for a day or more, echoing up the valley of the Rhine. They reached Nijmegen without incident, though the boat was so crowded with refugees – some of them with suppurating wounds – that she was unable to take more than the occasional catnap. When they debarked, Joachim – who is a Person of Quality in the Palatinate – recognized them as they stumbled down the gangplank, and brought them to me. Now the current of the Rhine slowly flushes us, and a lot of other war-flotsam, downstream towards the sea. I have oft heard French and Germans alike speak disparagingly of the Netherlands, likening the country to a gutter that collects all the refuse and fœces of Christendom, but lacks the vigor to force it out to sea, so that it piles up in a bar around Rotterdam. It is a cruel and absurd way to talk about a noble and brave little country. Yet as I look on my condition, and on that of the Princesses, and review our recent travels (blundering about in dark and dangerous parts until we stumbled upon running water, then drifting downstream), I can recognize a kind of cruel truth in that slander. We shall not, however, let ourselves be flushed out to sea. At Rotterdam we divert from the river's natural course and follow a canal to the Hague. There the Princesses can find refuge, just as did the Winter Queen at the end of her wanderings. And there I shall try to deliver a coherent report to the Prince of Orange. This bit of embroidery is ruined before it was finished, but it contains the information that William has been waiting for. When I have finished my report I may make it into a pillow. Everyone who sees it will wonder at my foolishness for keeping such a dirty, stained, faded thing around the house. But I will keep it in spite of them. It is an important thing to me now. When I started it, I only intended to use it to record details of French troop movements and the like. But as the weeks went on and I frequently found myself with plenty of time on my hands to tend to my needlework, I began to record some of my thoughts and feelings about what was going on around me. Perhaps I did this out of boredom; but perhaps it was so that some part of me might live on, if I were killed or made a captive along the way. This might sound like a foolish thing to have done, but a woman who has no family and few friends is forever skirting the edges of a profound despair, which derives from the fear that she could vanish from the world and leave no trace she had ever existed; that the things she has done shall be of no account and the perceptions she has formed (as of Dr. von Pfung for example) shall be swallowed up like a cry in a dark woods. To write out a full confession and revelation of my doings, as I've done here, is not without danger; but if I did not do so I would be so drowned in melancholy that I would do nothing at all, in which event my life truly would be of no account. This way, at least, I am part of a story, like the ones Mummy used to tell me in the banyolar in Algiers, and like the ones that were told by Shahrazad, who prolonged her own life for a thousand and one nights by the telling of tales. But given the nature of the cypher that I am using, chances are that you, reader, will never exist, and so I cannot see why I should continue running this needle through the dirty old cloth when I am so tired, and the rocking of the boat invites me to close my eyes. Rossignol to Louis XIV Continued NOVEMBER 1688 Your majesty will have been dismayed by the foregoing tale of treason and perfidy. If it were generally known, I fear it would do grave damage to the reputation of your majesty's sister-in-law the duchesse d'Orléans. She is said to be prostrate with grief, and ungrateful for all that your majesty's legions have done in order to secure her rights in the Palatinate. Out of a gentleman's respect for her rank, and humane compassion for her feelings, I have been as discreet as possible with this intelligence which could only bring her further suffering if it were known. I have shared the foregoing account only with your majesty. D'Avaux has importuned me for a copy, but I have deflected his many requests and will continue to do so unless your majesty instructs me to send the document to him. In the weeks that I have spent in the decypherment of this document, Phobos and Deimos have been unleashed on the east bank of the Rhine. The lead that the Countess so assiduously followed to the banks of the Meuse has been conveyed in bulk to the Palatinate, and ended its long journey traveling at inconceivable velocities through the bodies and the buildings of heretics. Half the young blades of Court have quit Versailles to go hunting in Germany, and many of them write letters, which it is my duty to read. I am told that Heidelberg Castle burnt brilliantly for days, and that everyone is looking forward to repeating the experiment in Mannheim. Philippsburg, Mainz, Speier, Trier, Worms, and Oppenheim are scheduled for later in the year. As winter draws on, your majesty will be troubled to learn of all the brutality. You will draw your forces back, and give Louvois a firm scolding for having acted so excessively. Historians will record that the Sun King cannot be held responsible for all of the unpleasantness. From your majesty's many excellent sources in England, your majesty will know that the Prince of Orange is now there, commanding an army made up not only of Dutchmen, but of the English and Scottish regiments that were stationed on Dutch soil by treaty; Huguenot scum who filtered up from France; mercenaries and freebooters from Scandinavia; and Prussians who've been lent to the cause by Sophie Charlotte – the daughter of the cursed Hanoverian bitch Sophie. All of which only seems to prove that Europe is a chessboard. Even your majesty cannot gain (say) the Rhine without sacrificing (say) England. Likewise, whatever Sophie and William may gain from their ceaseless machinations they'll have to pay for in the end. And as for the Countess de la Zeur, why, the new King of England might make her Duchess of Qwghlm, but in return your majesty will no doubt see to it that her sacrifices are commensurate. M. le comte d'Avaux has redoubled his surveillance of the Countess in the Hague. He has received assurances from the laundresses who work in the house of Huygens that she has not bled a single drop of menstrual blood in the nearly two months she's been there. She is pregnant with a bastard of Arcachon. She is therefore now a part of the family of France, of which your majesty is the patriarch. As it is become a family matter, I will refrain from any further meddling unless your majesty instructs me otherwise. I have the honour to be, your majesty's humble and obedient servant, Bonaventure Rossignol Sheerness, England 11 DECEMBER 1688 Then the Kings countenance was changed, and his thoghts troubled him, so that the joyntes of his loines were loosed, and his knees smote one against the other. – Daniel 5:6 ON ANY OTHER DAY, DANIEL did not have a thing in common with anyone else at the Court of St. James. Indeed, that was the very reason he was allowed to bide there. Today, though, he had two things in common with them. One, that he had spent most of the preceding night, and most of this day, traipsing all over Kent trying to figure out where the King had got to. And two, that he stood in utmost need of a pint. Finding himself alone on a boat-flecked mudflat, and happening on a tavern, he entered it. The only thing he sought in that place was that pint and maybe a banger. In additition to which, he found James (by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the occasional odd bit of France) Stuart being beaten up by a couple of drunken English fishermen. It was just the sort of grave indignity absolute monarchs tried at all costs to avoid. In normal times, procedures and safeguards were in place to prevent it. One could imagine one of the ancient Kings of England, say, your Sven Forkbeard, or your Ealhmund the Under-King of Kent, wandering into an inn somewhere and throwing a few punches. But barroom brawling had been pushed off the bottom of the list of Things Princes Should Know How to Do during the great Chivalry vogue of five centuries back. And it showed: King James II had a bloody nose. To be fair, though, he'd been having an epic one for weeks. As past generations sang of Richard Lionheart's duels against Saladin before Jerusalem, future ones would sing of James Stuart's nosebleed. It was, in sum, not a scenario that had ever been contemplated by the authors of the etiquette-books that Daniel had perused when he'd gone into the Courtier line of work. He'd have known just how to address the King during a masque at the Banqueting House or a hunt in a royal game-park. But when it came to breaking up a royal bar-fight in a waterfront dive at the mouth of the Medway, he was at a loss, and could only order himself that pint, and consider his next move. His Majesty was standing up to the treatment surprisingly well. Of course, he'd fought in battles on land and at sea; no one had ever accused him of being a ninehammer. And this altercation was really more of a cuffing and slapping about: not so much fight as improvised entertainment by and for men who got out to Punchinello shows only infrequently. This was a very old tavern, half sunk into the riverside muck, and the ceiling was so close to the floor that the fishermen scarcely had room to draw their fists back properly. There were flurries of jabs that failed to connect with any part of the King's body. The blows that did land were open-handed, roundhouse slaps. Daniel sensed that if the King would only stop flinching, say something funny, and buy a round for the house, everything would change. But if he were that sort of King he wouldn't have ended up here in the first place. At any rate Daniel was immensely relieved that it was not a serious beating. Otherwise he would've been obliged to draw the sword hanging from his belt, which he had no idea how to use. King James II most certainly would know what to do with it, of course. As Daniel plunged his upper lip through the curtain of foam on his pint, he had a moment's phant'sy of unbelting the weapon and tossing it across the room to the sovereign, who'd snatch it from the air, whip it out, and commence slaying subjects. Then Daniel could perhaps embroider ‘pon his deed by smashing a bit of crockery over someone's head – better yet, sustain an honorable wound or two. This would guarantee him a free, all-expenses paid, but strictly one-way trip to France, where he'd probably be rewarded with an English earldom that he'd never be able to visit, and get to lounge around in James's exile court all day. This phant'sy did not last for very long. One of the King's attackers had felt something in His Majesty's coat-pocket and yanked it out: a crucifix. A moment of silence. Those here who were conscious enough to see the object, felt obliged to give it due reverence; either because it was an emblem of Our Lord's passion, or because it was made predominantly out of gold. Through the tavern's atmosphere, which had approximately the mass and consistency of aspic, the artifact gleamed attractively, and even cast off a halo. Descartes had abhorred the idea of a vacuum, and held that what we took to be empty space was really a plenum, a solidly packed ocean of particles, swirling and colliding, trading and trafficking in a fixed stock of movement that had been imparted to the universe at its creation by the Almighty. He must have come up with that idea in a tavern like this one; Daniel wasn't sure a pistol-ball would be able to dig a tunnel through this air from one side of the room to the other. 'What's this, then!?' the fellow holding up the crucifix wanted to know. James II looked suddenly exasperated. 'Why, it is a crucifix!' Another blank moment passed. Daniel had completely let go of the idea of being an exiled earl at Versailles, and was now feeling uncomfortably rabble-like himself, and strongly tempted to go and take a poke at His Majesty – if only for the sake of Drake, who'd never have hesitated. 'Well, if you're not a bleeding Jesuit spy, then why're you bearing this bit o' idolatry about!?' demanded the fellow with the quick hands, shaking the crucifix just out of the King's reach. 'Didjer loot it? Didjer steal this holy object from a burnin' church, didjer?' They had no idea who he was.At this the scene made sense for the first time. Until then Daniel had wondered just who was suffering from syphilitic hallucinations around here! James had surprised all London by galloping away from Whitehall Palace after midnight. Someone had caught sight of him hurling the Great Seal of the Realm into the Thames, which was not a wholly usual thing for the Sovereign to do, and with that he'd pelted off into the night, east-bound, and no person of gentle or noble rank had seen him since, until the moment Daniel had blundered into this tavern in search of refreshment. Mercifully, the urge to sprint over and take a swing at the royal gob had passed. A semi-comatose man, slumped on a bench against the wall, was eyeing Daniel in a way that was not entirely propitious. Daniel reflected that if it was considered meet and proper for a well-heeled stranger to be beaten up and robbed on the mere suspicion that he was a Jesuit, things might not go all that well for Daniel Waterhouse the Puritan. He drained about half the pint and turned round in the middle of the tavern so that his cloak fell open, revealing the sword. The weapon's existence was noted, with professional interest, by the tavernkeeper, who didn't look directly at it; he was one of those blokes who used peripheral vision for everything. Give him a spyglass, he'd raise it to his ear, and see as much as Galileo. His nose had been broken at least twice and he'd endured a blowout fracture of the left eye-socket, which made it seem as if his face were a clay effigy squirting out between the fingers of a clenching fist. Daniel said to him, 'Let your friends understand that if serious harm comes to that gentleman, there lives a witness who'll tell a tale to make a judge's wig uncurl.' And then Daniel stepped out onto a deal boardwalk that might've answered to the name of verandah or pier, depending on whence you looked at it. In theory boats of shallow draught might be poled up to it and made fast, in practice they'd been drawn up on the muck about a horseshoe-throw away from the crusty ankles of its pilings. The tracks of the boatmen were swollen wounds in the mudflat, and spatterings across the planks. Half a mile out, diverse ships were riding at anchor in the wide spot where the Medway exhausted into the Thames. It was low tide! James, the sea-hero, the Admiral who'd fought the Dutch, and occasionally beaten 'em, who'd made Isaac Newton's ears ring with the distant roar of his cannons, had galloped out from London at exactly the wrong moment. Like King Canute, he would have to wait for the tide. It was simply too awful. Exhausted from the ride, left with no choice but to kill a few hours, the King must've wandered into this tavern – and why not? Every place he'd ever entered into, people had served him on bended knee. But James, who did not drink and did not curse, who stuttered, who couldn't speak the English of fishermen, might as well have been in a Hindoo temple. He'd switched to a dark wig from the usual blond one, and it had been knocked from his head early in the scuffle, revealing a half-bald head, thin yellow-white hair in a Caesar cut, shellacked to his pocked pate by sweat and grease. Wigs enabled one to avert one's attention from the fact of the wearer's age. Daniel had seen an odd-looking chap, fifty-five years old, lost. Daniel was beginning to feel he had more in common with this syphilitic Papist despot than with the people of Sheerness. He did not like where his feelings were taking him. So he had his feet take him elsewhere – to what passed for the high street of Sheerness, to an inn, where an uncommon number of well-dressed gentlemen were milling about, wringing their hands and kicking at the chickens. These men, Daniel included, had come out from London post-haste, only a few hours behind their fleeing King, on the presumption that if the Sovereign had left London, then they must all be missing something important by tarrying in the city. Wrong! HE WENT IN AND TOLD the tale to Ailesbury, the Gentleman of the Bedchamber, then turned to leave; but practically ended up with spur-marks in his back, as every courtier wanted to be first on the spot. In the stable-yard a horse was brought out for Daniel. Climbing into the saddle, and ascending to the same plane as all the other equestrians, he noted diverse faces turned his way, none of them looking very patient. So without sharing in any of the sense of romantic drama that animated all of the others, he rode out into the street, and led them on a merry gallop back down to the river. To uninformed bystanders, it must have looked like a Cavalier hunting-party pursuing a Roundhead, which Daniel hoped was no prefiguring of events to follow. When they reached the tavern, an astounding number of Persons of Quality packed themselves inside, and commenced making stentorian announcements. One might've expected drunks and ne'er-do-wells to flood out through windows and trap-doors, like mice fleeing when the lantern is lit, but not a soul left the building, even after it was made known that they were all in the Presence. There seemed, in other words, to be a general failure, among the waterfront lowlives of Sheerness, to really take the notion of monarchy seriously. Daniel lingered outside for a minute or two. The sun was setting behind a gapped cloud-front and shoving fat rays of gaudy light across the estuary of the Medway: a big brackish sump a few miles across, with a coastline as involuted as a brain, congested with merchant and naval traffic. Most of the latter huddled sheepishly down at the far end, behind the chain that was stretched across the river, below the sheltering guns of Upnor Castle. James had for some reason expected William of Orange's fleet to attack there, in the worst possible place. Instead the Protestant Wind had driven the Dutchman all the way to Tor Bay, hundreds of miles to the west – almost Cornwall. Since then the Prince had been marching steadily eastwards. English regiments marched forth to stand in his path, only to defect and about-face. If William was not in London yet, he would be soon. The waterfront people were already reverting to a highly exaggerated Englishness: womenfolk were scurrying toward the tavern, hitching up their skirts to keep 'em out of the muck, so that they glissaded across the tidelands like bales on rails. They were bringing victuals to the King! They hated him and wanted him gone. But that was no reason to be inhospitable. Daniel had reasons to tarry – he felt he should go in and say good-bye to the King. And, to be pragmatic, he was fairly certain he could be charged with horse-thievery if he turned this mount towards London. On the other hand, he had another hour of twilight, and the low tide could cut a few hours off the time it would take him to work his way round the estuary, cross the river, and find the high road to London. He had the strongest feeling that important things were happening there; and as for the King, and his improvised Court here at Sheerness: if the local pub scum couldn't bring themselves to take him seriously, why should the Secretary of the Royal Society? Daniel aimed his horse's backside at the King of England and then spurred the animal forward into the light. Since the time of the Babylonian astronomers, solar eclipses had from time to time caused ominous shadows to fall upon the land. But England in winter sometimes afforded its long-suffering populace a contrary phenomenon, which was that after weeks of dim colorless skies, suddenly the sun would scythe in under the clouds after it had seemed to set, and wash the landscape with pink, orange, and green illumination, clear and pure as gems. Empiricist though he was, Daniel felt free to ascribe meaning to this when it went his way. Ahead all was clear light, as if he were riding into stained glass. Behind (and he only bothered to look back once) the sky was a bruise-colored void, the land a long scrape of mud. The tavern rose up from the middle of the waste on a sheave of pilings that leaned into each other like a crowd of drunks. Its plank walls pawed a bit of light out of the sky, its one window glowed like a carbuncle. It was the sort of grotesque sky-scape that Dutchmen would come over to paint. But come to think of it, a Dutchman had come over and painted it. MOST TRAVELERS WOULD TAKE LITTLE note of Castle Upnor. It was but a stone fort, built by Elizabeth a hundred years ago, but looking much older – its vertical stone walls obsolete already. But since the Restoration it had been the nominal seat of Louis Anglesey, the Earl of Upnor, and owner of the fair Abigail Frome (or at least Daniel presumed she was fair). As such it gave Daniel the shudders; he felt like a little boy riding past a haunted house. He'd have gone wide of it if he could, but the ferry next to it was by far the most expeditious way of crossing the Medway, and this was no time to let superstition take him out of his way. The alternative would've been to ride a few miles up the east bank to the huge naval shipyard of Chatham, where there were several ways of getting across. But passing through a naval base did not seem the most efficient way of getting around, during a foreign invasion. He pretended to give his horse a few minutes' rest at the ferry landing, and did what half-hearted spying he could. The sun was positively down now and everything was dark blue on a backdrop of even darker blue. The Castle fronted on the west bank of the river and was buried in its own shadow. However, lights were burning in some of the windows, and particularly in the outbuildings. A sharp two-masted vessel was anchored in the dredged channel nearby. When the Dutch had sailed up here in '67 and, over the course of a leisurely three-day rampage, stolen some of Charles II's warships and burned diverse others, Castle Upnor had acquitted itself reasonably well, declining to surrender and taking pot-shots at any Dutchmen who'd come anywhere near close enough. The Earl of Upnor, whose travails with gambling debts and Popish Plot hysteria still lay in the future, had picked up some reflected luster. But to have one's chief Navy Yard infested with Dutchmen was embarrassing even to a foreign-policy slut like Charles II. So modern defenses with proper earthworks had since been put up in the neighborhood, and Upnor had been demoted to the status of a giant powder-magazine, sort of an outlying gunpowder depot for the Tower of London – the unspoken message being that no one cared if it blew up. Powder-barges came hither frequently from the Tower and moored in the place claimed, tonight, by that two-master. Daniel knew only a little of ships, but even a farmer could see that this one had several cabins astern, well-appointed with windows, and lights burning behind their drawn curtains and closed shutters. Louis Anglesey hardly ever came to this place, as why should any Earl in his right mind go to a dank stone pit to sit upon powder-kegs? And yet in times of trouble there were worse places to bolt. Those stone walls might not stop Dutch cannonballs, but they would keep Protestant mobs at bay for weeks, and the river was only a few steps away; once he stepped off the quay and boarded his boat, Upnor was as good as in France. There were a few watchmen posted about the place, hugging their pikes to their chests so they could keep their hands stuffed into their armpits, shooting the breeze, mostly gazing outwards towards the Roman road, occasionally turning round to enjoy some snatch of domestic comedy playing itself out within the walls. Potato peels and chicken feathers were bobbing in the river's back-waters, and he caught whiffs of yeast on the breeze. There was, in other words, a functioning household there. Daniel decided that Upnor was not here at the moment, but that he was expected. Perhaps not tonight, but soon. He left Castle Upnor behind him and went back to riding around England by himself in the dark, which seemed to be how he had spent half of his life. Now that he'd crossed over the Medway there were no real barriers between him and London, which was something like twenty-five miles away. Even if there hadn't been a Roman road to follow, he probably would have been able to find the route by riding from one fire to the next. The only hazard was that some mob might take him for an Irishman. That Daniel bore no resemblance to an Irishman was of no account – rumors had spread that James had shipped in a whole legion of Celtic avengers. No doubt many an Englishman would agree, tonight, that strange riders should be burnt first and identified on the basis of their dental peculiarities after the ashes had cooled. So it was boredom and terror, boredom and terror, all the way. The boring bits gave Daniel some leisure to ponder the quite peculiar family curse he seemed to be living under, namely, this marked tendency to be present at the demise of English Kings. He'd literally seen Charles I's head roll, and he'd watched Charles II being done in by his physicians, and now this. If the next Sovereign knew what was good for him, he'd make sure Daniel was assigned, by the Royal Society, to spend the rest of his life taking daily measurements of the baroscopic pressure in Barbados. The last bit of his route ran within view of the river, which was a pleasant sight, a snaking constellation of ships' lanterns. By contrast the flat countryside was studded with pylons of streaming fire that warmed Daniel's face from half a mile away, like the first uncontrollable flush of shame. Mostly these were simply bonfires, which were the only way Englishmen had of showing emotion. But in one town that he rode through, the Catholic church was being not merely burnt but pulled down, its very bricks prised apart by men with sharpened bars – men made orange by the fire-light, not people he recognized, any more, as countrymen. The river attracted him. At first he told himself that it did so because it was cool and serene. When he got finally to Greenwich he turned aside from the road and rode onto the lumpy pasture of the Park. He couldn't see a damned thing, which was funny because the place was supposed to be an Observatory. But he kept to a policy of insisting that his horse go the way it didn't want to – which meant uphill. This had more than a little in common with trying to get a large and basically prosperous country to revolt. A saltbox of a building perched on the edge of a precipice in the midst of this little range of hills out in the middle of nowhere: a house, queer-looking and haunted. Haunted by philosophers. Its pedestal – a brick of living-space – was surrounded by trees in a way that obscured the view out its windows. Any other tenant would have chopped them down. But Flamsteed had let them grow; they made no difference to him, as he slept all day, and his nights were devoted to looking not out but up. Daniel reached a place where he could see the light of London shining through gaps among trees. The lambent sky was dissected by the spidery black X of the sixty-foot refracting telescope, supported by a mast scavenged from a tall ship. As he neared the crest he diverted to the right, instinctively avoiding Flamsteed, who exerted a mysterious repulsive force all his own. He was likely to be awake, but unable to make observations because of the light in the sky, therefore more irritable than usual, perhaps scared. His apartment's windows had solid wooden shutters that he had clapped shut for safety. He was holed up in one of the tiny rooms, probably unable to hear anything save the ticking of diverse clocks. Upstairs, in the octagonal saltbox, were two Hooke-designed, Tompion-built clocks with thirteen-foot pendulums that ticked, or rather clunked, every two seconds, slower than the human heartbeat, a hypnotic rhythm that could be felt everywhere in the building. Daniel led his horse on a slow traverse round the top of the hill. Below, along the riverbank, the brick ruins of Placentia, the Tudor palace, swung gradually into view. Then the new stone buildings that Charles II had begun to put up there. Then the Thames: first the Greenwich bend, then a view straight upriver all the way into the east end. Then all of London was suddenly unrolled before him. Its light shone from the wizened surface of the river, interrupted only by the silhouettes of the anchored ships. If he had not long ago seen the Fire of London with his own eyes, he might have supposed that the whole city was ablaze. He had entered into the upper reaches of a little wood of oak and apple trees that gripped the steepest part of the hill. Flamsteed's apartments were only a few yards above and behind him along the Prime Meridian. The fragrance of fermenting apples was heady, for Flamsteed had not bothered to collect them as they dropped from the trees during the autumn. Daniel did not bother to tie his horse, but let it forage there, getting fed and drunk on the apples. Daniel moved to a place where he could see London between trees, dropped his breeches, squatted down on his haunches, and began experimenting with various pelvic settings in hopes of allowing some urine to part with his body. He could feel the boulder in his bladder, shifting from side to side like a cannonball in a poke. London had never been so bright since it had burned to the ground twenty-two years ago. And it had never sounded thus in all its ages. As Daniel's ears adjusted themselves to this quiet hill-top he could hear a clamor rising up from the city, not of guns or of cart-wheels but of human voices. Sometimes they were just babbling, each to his own, but many times they came together in dim choruses that swelled, clashed, merged, and collapsed, like waves of a tide probing and seeking its way through the mazy back-waters of an estuary. They were singing a song, Lilliburlero, that had become universal in the last few weeks. It was a sort of nonsense-song but its meaning was understood by all: down with the King, down with Popery, out with the Irish. If the scene in the tavern hadn't made it clear enough, the very appearance of the city tonight told him that the thing had happened – the thing that Daniel had been calling the Revolution. The Revolution was done, it had been Glorious, and what made it glorious was that it had been an anticlimax. There'd been no Civil War this time, no massacres, no trees bent under the weight of hanged men, no slave-ships. Was Daniel flattering himself to suppose that this could be put down to his good work? All his upbringing had taught him to expect a single dramatic moment of apocalypse. Instead this had been slow evolution spread all round and working silently, like manure on a field. If anything important had happened, it had done so in places where Daniel wasn't. Buried in it somewhere was an inflection point that later they'd point to as the Moment It All Happened. He was not such an old tired Puritan that he didn't get joy out of it. But its very anticlimactitude, if that was a word, its diffuseness, was a sort of omen to him. It was like being an astronomer, up in that tower behind him, at the moment that the letter arrived from the Continent in which Kepler mentioned that the earth was not, in fact, at the center of the universe. Like that astronomer, Daniel had much knowledge, and only some of it was wrong – but all of it had to be gone over now, and re-understood. This realization settled him down a bit. As when a queer wind-gust comes down chimney and fills a room of merry-makers with smoke, and covers the pudding with a black taste. He was not quite ready for life in this England. Now he understood why he'd felt so attracted to the river earlier: not because it was serene, but because it had the power to take him somewhere else. He left the horse there, with an explanatory note for Flamsteed, who'd be apoplectic. He walked down to the Thames and woke up a waterman he knew there, a Mr. Bhnh, the patriarch of a tiny Qwghlmian settlement lodged in the south bank. Mr. Bhnh had grown so accustomed to the nocturnal crossings of Natural Philosophers that someone had nominated him, in jest, as a Fellow of the Royal Society. He agreed to convey Daniel across to the Isle of Dogs on the north bank. Of late, reductions in the cost of window-glass, and improvements in the science of architecture, had made it possible to build whole blocks of shops with large windows facing the street, so that fine goods could be set out in view of passers-by. Shrewd builders such as Sterling (the Earl of Willesden) Waterhouse and Roger (the Marquis of Ravenscar) Comstock had built neighborhoods where courtiers went to do just that. The noun 'shop' had been verbed; people went 'shopping' now. Daniel of course never lowered himself to this newfangled vice – except that as he crossed the river he seemed to be doing it with ships. And he was a discriminating shopper. The watermen's boats, the smacks and barges of the estuary were beneath his notice altogether, and the coasting vessels – anything with a fore-and-aft rig – were scarcely more than impediments. He raised his eyes up out of the clutter to scan for the great ships thrusting their yards up, like High Church priests exalting the sacraments above the rabble, into the sky where the wind blew straight and brave. The sails hung from those yards like vestments. There were not many such ships in the Pool tonight, but Daniel sought them all out and appraised each one shrewdly. He was shopping for something to take him away; he wanted to voyage out of sight of land for once in his life, to die and be buried on another continent. One in particular caught his eye: trim, clean-lined, and sharply managed. She was taking advantage of the in-coming tide to make her way up-stream, ushered forward by a faint southerly breeze. The movement of the air was too faint for Daniel to feel it, but the crew of this ship, Hare, had seen flickers of life in the streamers dangling from her mastheads, and spread out her topsails. These stopped a bit of air. They stopped some of the fire-light from the city, too, projecting long prismatic shadows off into the void. The sails of Hare hovered above the black river, glowing like curtained windows. Mr. Bhnh tracked them for half a mile or so, taking advantage of the lead that the great ship forced among the smaller vessels. 'She's fitted out for a long voyage,' he mused, 'probably sailing for America on the next tide.' 'Would I had a grapnel,' Daniel said, 'I'd climb aboard like a pirate, and stow away on her.' This startled Mr. Bhnh, who was not used to hearing such flights of fancy from his clientele. 'Are you going to America, Mr. Waterhouse?' 'Someday,' Daniel allowed, 'there is tidying-up to do in this country yet.' Mr. Bhnh was loath to discharge Daniel in the fiery wilds of East London, which tonight was thronged with drunken mudlarks lighting out in torrid pursuit of real or imaginary Jesuits. Daniel gave no heed to this good man's worries. He had made it all the way from Sheerness without any trouble. Even in the tavern there, he had been left alone. Those who took any notice of him at all, soon lost their interest, or (strange to relate) lost their nerve and looked away. For Daniel carried now the unstudied nonchalance of a man who knew he'd be dead in a year no matter what; people seemed to smell the grave about him, and were happy to leave him alone. On the other hand, a man with little time to live, and no heirs, need not be so miserly. 'I shall give you a pound if you take me direct to the Tower,' Daniel said. Then, observing a wary look on Mr. Bhnh's face, he teased his purse open and tossed a handful of coins beside the boat's lantern until he found one that shone a little, and was nearly round. In the center was a battered and scratched plop of silver that with careful tilting and squinting and use of the imagination could be construed as a portrait of the first King James, who had died sixty-some odd years ago, but who was held to have managed the Mint competently. The waterman's hand closed over this artifact and almost as quickly Daniel's eyelids came to with an almost palpable slamming noise. He was remotely aware of massive wool blankets being thrown over his body by the solicitous Mr. Bhnh, and then he was aware of nothing. For the King of the North shal returne, and shal set forthe a greater multitude then afore, and shal come forthe (after certeine yeres) with a mightie armie, & great riches. And at the same time there shal manie stand up against the King of the South: also the rebellious children of thy people shal exalte them selves to establish the vision, but they shal fall. So the King of the North shal come, and cast up a mounte, & take the strong citie: and the armes of the South shal not resist, neither his chosen people, neither shal there be anie strength to withstand. – Daniel 11:13–15 HAVING GONE TO SLEEP in that boat on that night he should on no account have been surprised to wake up in the same boat on the same night; but when it happened he was perfectly a-mazed, and had to see and understand everything afresh. His body was hot on the top and cold on the bottom, and on the whole, not happy with its management. He tried closing and opening his eyes a few times to see if he could conjure up a warm bed, but a mightier conjuration had been wrought on him, and condemned him to this place and time. To call it nightmarish was too easy, for it had all the detail, the lively perversity that nightmares wanted. London – burning, smoking, singing – was still all around. However, he was confronted by a sheer wall of stone that rose up out of the Thames, and was thickly jacketed in all of the unspeakables that flowed in it. Atop that wall was a congeries of small buildings, hoists, large guns, a few relatively small and disciplined bonfires, armed men, but snarls of running boys, too. There was the smell of coal, iron, and sulfur, reminding Daniel of Isaac's laboratory. And because the sense of smell is plumbed into the mind down in the cellar, where dark half-formed notions lurk and breed, Daniel entertained a momentary phant'sy that Isaac had come to London and set his mind to the acquisition of temporal power, and constructed a laboratory the size of Jerusalem. Then he perceived stone walls and towers rising up behind this wharf, and taller ones rising up behind them, and an even higher fort of pale stone above and behind those, and he understood that he lay before the Tower of London. The roar of the artificial cataracts between the starlings of London Bridge, off to his left, confirmed it. The wharf-wall was pierced by an arch whose floor was a noisome back-water of the Thames. The boat of Mr. Bhnh was more or less keeping station before that arch, though the current was flowing one way and the tide striving against it, so they were being ill-used by marauding vortices and pounced upon by rogue waves. The waterman, in other words, was using every drowning-avoidance skill he'd practised in the rocky flows off Qwghlm, and more than earning his pound. For in addition to duelling those currents he had been prosecuting a negotiation with a figure who stood on the top of the wharf, just above the arch. That man in turn was exchanging shouts through a speaking trumpet with a periwigged gentleman up on the parapet of the wall behind: a crenellated medieval sort of affair with a modern cannon poking out through each slot, and each cannon conspicuously manned. Some of the men on the wharf were standing near enough to bonfires that Daniel could make out the colors of their garments. These were the Black Torrent Guards. Daniel rose up against the gravity of many stout damp blankets, his body reminding him of every injustice he had dealt it since he had been awakened, twenty-four hours ago, with news that the King had gone on the lam. 'Sergeant!' he hollered to the man on the wharf, 'please inform yonder officer that the escaped prisoner has returned.' THE KING'S OWN BLACK TORRENT Guards had gone into the west country with King James just long enough for their commander, John Churchill, to sneak away from camp and ride to join up with William of Orange. This might have surprised some of the Guards, but it had not surprised Daniel, for almost a year ago he had personally conveyed letters from John Churchill, among others, to the Prince of Orange in the Hague; and though he hadn't read those letters, he could guess what they had said. Within a few days, Churchill and his regiment had been back in London. But if they'd hoped to be stationed back at their old haunt of Whitehall, they'd been disappointed. William, still trying to sort out his newly acquired Kingdom, was posting his own Dutch Blue Guards at the royal palaces of Whitehall and St. James, and was happy to keep Churchill and the Black Torrent Guards at arm's length in the Tower – which needed defending in any case, as it housed the Royal Mint, and controlled the river with its guns, and was the chief arsenal of the Realm. Now Daniel was known, to the men of that regiment, as a wretch who'd been imprisoned there by King James II; one cheer for Daniel! Jeffreys had sent murderers to slay him – two cheers! And he had arrived at some untalked-about agreement with Sergeant Bob: three cheers! So in the last weeks before his 'escape' Daniel had become a sort of regimental mascot – as Irish regiments kept giant wolf-hounds, this one had a Puritan. And so the long and the short of it was that Mr. Bhnh was suffered to bring his boat through that tunnel under the wharf. After they passed under the arch, the sky appeared again briefly, but a good half of it was occulted by that out-thrust bulwark: St. Thomas's Tower, a fortress unto itself, grafted to the outer wall of the Tower complex, straddling another stone arch-way paved with fœtid moat-water. Their progress was barred by a water-gate filling that arch. But as they approached, the gates were drawn open, each vertical bar leaving an arc of oily vortices in its wake. Mr. Bhnh hesitated, as any sane man would, and tilted his head back for a moment, in case he never got a chance to see the sky again. Then he probed for the bottom with his pole. 'This is my family coat of arms, such as it is,' Daniel remarked, 'a stone castle bestriding a river.' 'Don't say that!' Mr. Bhnh hissed. 'Why ever not?' 'We are entering into Traitor's Gate!' PAST THE NARROW APERTURE OF THE Gate lay a pool vaulted over with a vast, fair stone arch. Some engineer had lately constructed a tide-driven engine there for raising water to a cistern in some higher building back in the penetralia of the citadel, and its fearsome grinding – like a troll gnashing its teeth in a cave – appalled Mr. Bhnh more than anything he'd seen all night. He took his leave gladly. Daniel had disembarked onto some ancient slime-covered stairs. He ascended, carefully, to the level of the Water Lane, which ran between the inner and outer fortifications. This had become the scene of a makeshift camp: several hundred Irish people at least were here, taking their ease on blankets or thin scatterings of straw, smoking pipes if they were lucky, playing hair-raising plaints on penny-whistles. No celebratory bonfires here: just a few brooding cook-fires setting kettle-bottoms aglow, and begrudging faint red warmth on the hands and faces of the squatters. There had to be a rational explanation for their being here, but Daniel could not conjure one up. But that was what made city life interesting. Bob Shaftoe approached, harried by a couple of boys who were running around barefoot even though this was December. He ordered them away gruffly, even a bit cruelly, and as they turned to run off, Daniel got a look at one of their faces. He thought he saw a familial resemblance to Bob. Sergeant Shaftoe was headed down the lane in the direction of the Byward Tower, which was the way out to London. Daniel fell into step beside him and in a few paces they'd left the water-engine far enough behind that they could talk without shouting. 'I was ready to set off without you,' Bob said somewhat bitterly. 'For where?' 'I don't know. Castle Upnor.' 'He's not there yet. I'd wager he's still in London.' 'Let's to Charing Cross, then,' Bob said, 'as I think he has a house near there.' 'Can we get horses?' 'You mean, is the Lieutenant of the Tower going to supply you, an escaped prisoner, with a free horse – ?' 'Never mind, there are other ways of getting down the Strand. Any news concerning Jeffreys?' 'I have impressed ‘pon Bob Carver the grave importance of his providing useful information to us concerning that man's whereabouts,' Bob said. 'I do not think his fear was affected; on the other hand, he has a short memory, and London contains many diversions to-night, most appealing to a man of his character.' Passing through the Byward Tower they came out into the open and began to traverse the causeway over the moat: first a plank bridge that could be moved out of the way, then a stone ramp onto the permanent causeway. Here they encountered John Churchill, smoking a pipe in the company of two armed gentlemen whom Daniel recognized well enough that he could have recalled their names, had it been worth the effort. Churchill broke away from them when his eyes fell on Daniel, and pursued for a few steps, glaring at Bob Shaftoe in a way that meant 'keep walking.' So Daniel ended up isolated in mid-causeway, face to face with Churchill. 'In truth I have no idea whether you're about to embrace and thank me, or stab me and shove me into the moat,' Daniel blurted, because he was nervous, and too exhausted to govern his tongue. Churchill appeared to take Daniel's words with utmost gravity – Daniel reckoned he must've said something terribly meaningful, out of blind luck. Daniel had encountered Churchill many times at Whitehall, where he had always been surrounded by a sort of aura or nimbus of Import, of which his wig was only the innermost core. You could feel the man coming. He had never been more important than he was tonight – yet here on this causeway all that remained of his aura was his wig, which stood sore in need of maintenance. It was easy to see him as Sir Winston's lad, a Royal Society whelp who had gone to sojourn in the world of affairs. 'So it'll be for everyone, from now on,' Churchill said. 'The old schemes by which we reckoned a man's virtue have now been o'erthrown along with Absolute Monarchy. Your Revolution is pervasive. It is tricky, too. I don't know whether you will run afoul of its tricks in the end. But if you do, it shall not be by my hand . . .' 'Your face seems to say, ‘ provided. . . ' ' 'Provided you continue to be the enemy of my enemies – ' 'Alas, I've little choice.' 'So you say. But when you walk through yonder gate,' Churchill said, pointing toward the Middle Tower at the end of the causeway, which was visible only as a crenellated cutout in the orange sky, 'you'll find yourself in a London you no longer know. The changes wrought by the Fire were nothing. In that London, loyalty and allegiance are subtle and fluxional. 'Tis a chessboard with not only black and white pieces, but others as well, in diverse shades. You're a Bishop, and I'm a Knight, I can tell that much by our shapes, and the changes we have wrought on the board; but by fire-light 'Tis difficult to make out your true shade.' 'I have been awake for twenty-four hours and cannot follow your meaning when you speak in figures.' 'It is not that you are tired, but that you are a Puritan and a Natural Philosopher; neither group is admired for its grasp of the subtle and the ambiguous.' 'I am defenseless against your japes. But as we are not within earshot of anyone, please avail yourself of this opportunity to speak plainly.' 'Very well. I know many things, Mr. Waterhouse, because I make it my business to converse with fellows like those – we trade news as fervidly as traders swapping stocks on the ‘Change. And one thing I know is that Isaac Newton is in London to-night.' It struck Daniel as bizarre that John Churchill should even know who Isaac was. Until Churchill continued, 'Another thing I know is that Enoch turned up in our city a few days ago.' 'Enoch the Red?' 'Don't act like an imbecile. It makes me distrustful, as I know you are not one.' 'I take such a dim view of the Art that my heart denies what my mind knows.' 'That is just the sort of thing you would say if you were one of them, and wished to hide it.' 'Ah. Now I perceive what you meant with your talk of chess-pieces and colors – you think I am hiding the red robes of an Alchemist beneath these weeds?! What a thought!' 'You'd have me just know that the notion is absurd? Pray tell, sir, how should I know it? I'm not learned as you are, I'll admit it; but no one has yet accused me of being stupid. And I say to you that I do not know whether you are mixed up in Alchemy or no.' 'It is vexing to you,' Daniel thought aloud, 'not to follow it.' 'More than that, it is alarming. In a given circumstance, I know what a soldier will do, what a Puritan will do, what a French cardinal or a Vagabond will do – certain ones excepted – but the motives of the esoteric brotherhood are occult to me, and I do not love that. And as I look forward to being a man of moment in the new order – ' 'Yes, I know, I know.' Daniel sighed and tried to gather himself. 'Really, I think you make too much of them. For never have you seen such a gaggle of frauds, fops, ninehammers, and mountebanks.' 'Which of these is Isaac Newton?' The question was like a bung hammered into Daniel's gob. 'What of King Charles II? Which was His Majesty, ninehammer or mountebank?' 'I have to go and talk to them anyway,' Daniel finally said. 'If you can penetrate that cloud, Mr. Waterhouse, I shall consider myself obliged to you.' ' Howobliged?' 'What is on your mind?' 'If an earl dies on a night such as this, might it be overlooked?' 'Depends on the earl,' Churchill said evenly. 'There will be someone, somewhere, who'll not be of a mind to overlook it. You must never forget that.' 'I entered from the river tonight,' Daniel said. 'This is an oblique way of saying, you came in through the Traitor's Gate – ?' Daniel nodded. 'I arrived from the land, as you can see, but there shall be many who shall say that I passed through the same portal as you.' 'Which puts us in the same boat,' Daniel proclaimed. 'Now they say that there's no honor among thieves – I wouldn't know – but perhaps there may be a kind of honor among traitors. If I'm a traitor, I'm an honorable one; my conscience is clear, if not my reputation. So now I am holding my hand out to you, John Churchill, and you may stand there eyeing it all night long if you please. But if you would care to stand behind me and shore me up as I look into this question of Alchemy, I should like it very much if you took that hand in yours and shook it, as a gentleman; for as you have noticed the esoteric brotherhood is powerful, and I cannot work against it without a brotherhood of sorts to stand with me.' 'You have entered into contracts before, Mr. Waterhouse?' asked Churchill, still appraising Daniel's out-stretched hand. Daniel could sense Bob Shaftoe looking at them from one end of the causeway. 'Yes, as when working as an architect, et cetera. ' 'Then you know every contract involves obligations reciprocal. I might agree to ‘shore you up' when you are undermined – but in return I may call upon you from time to time.' Daniel's hand did not move. 'Very well, then,' said Churchill, reaching out across smoke, damp, and dark. CHARING CROSS was strewn with bonfires. But it was the green one that caught Daniel's eye. 'M'Lord Upnor's town-house lies this way,' shouted Bob Shaftoe, pointing insistently in the direction of Piccadilly. 'Work with me, Sergeant,' Daniel said, 'as if I were a guide taking you on a hunt for strange game of which you know nothing.' They began to push their way across the vast cosmos of the square, which was crowded with dark matter: huge mobs pressing in round bonfires, singing Lilliburlero, and diverse knaves who'd come up out of Hogs-den to prey upon 'em, and patchwork mutts fighting over anything that escaped the attention of the knaves. Daniel lost sight of the green flames for a while and was about to give up when he saw red flames shooting up in the same place – not the usual orange-red but an unnatural scarlet. 'If we should become separated, I shall meet you at the northern end of the Tilt Yard where King Street loses itself in the Cross.' 'Right you are, Guv.' 'Who was that boy I saw you talking to before the Bulwark, as we were leaving the Tower?' 'A messenger from Bob Carver.' 'Ah, what news from him?' 'The house of Jeffreys is boarded up, and dark.' 'If he went to the trouble of having it boarded up, then he's done a proper job.' 'It's as we reckoned it, these many weeks ago, Guv,' Bob answered, 'Jeffreys planned his departure well.' 'Well for us. If he fled in a panic, how would we find him? Has Mr. Carver any other news?' 'The intent was not to supply us with news, so much as to impress on us what a hard-working and diligent bloke he is.' 'That's what I was afraid of,' Daniel said, distracted by a rage of blue flame up ahead. 'Fireworks?' Bob guessed. 'Some plan their departures better than others,' Daniel answered. Finally they reached the southwestern margin of the square, where King Street bent round into Pall Mall, and the view of the park and the Spring Garden was screened by an arc of town-houses that seemed to bulge out into Charing Cross, like a dam holding back pressure behind. The bonfire that kept changing its color was planted before those houses, a bow-shot away. This one was not surrounded by any crowd. This might've been because the true center of drinking, singing, and sociability lay elsewhere, up towards Haymarket, or perhaps it could be laid to the fact that this fire sputtered evilly and let off vile smells. Daniel fell into orbit round it, and saw books, maps, and wooden boxes being dismantled and dissolved in the flames. A chest was being devoured, and small glass phials spilled out of it a few at a time, bursting in the heat to release jets of vapor that sometimes exploded in brilliant-colored flames. Bob Shaftoe nudged him and pointed toward one of the town-houses. The front door was being held open by a servant. Two younger servants were lugging a portmanteau out and down the front steps. The lid was half open and papers and books were spilling out. The servant who had held the door open let it fall to and then scurried after the others, picking up what they'd let drop, and stuffing it all together in a great wad, a double armload, which rested comfortably on his belly as he waddled across the dirt towards the fire. It looked as if he were planning to fling himself headlong into the particolored inferno, but he stopped just short and with a final grand belly-thrust projected the load of goods into the flames. A moment later the other two caught up with him and heaved the portmanteau right into perdition. The fire dimmed for a minute, seeming taken aback, but then the flames began to get their teeth into the new load of fuel, and to whiten as they built heat. Still circling round, Daniel stopped to stare at a map, drawn with inks of many colors upon excellent vellum. The hottest part of the fire was behind it, so the light shone through the empty places on the map – which were many, as it was a map of some mostly uncharted sea, the voids decorated with leviathans and dreadlocked cannibals. There was a scattering of islands literally gilded onto the page with some sort of golden ink, labelled 'Ye Islands of King Solomon.' As Daniel gazed at them, the ink finally burst into flames and burnt like trails of gunpowder; the words vanished from the world but were committed to his memory in letters of fire. 'It is the house of M. LeFebure,' Daniel explained, walking towards it with Bob in tow. 'Mark those three great windows above the entrance, glowering blood-red as the light shines through their curtains. Once I spied on Isaac Newton through those windows, using his own telescope.' 'What was he doing?' 'Making the acquaintance of the Earl of Upnor – who wanted to meet him so badly that he'd made arrangements for him to be followed.' 'What is that house, then? A den of sodomites?' 'No. It has been the chief nest of Alchemists in the city ever since the Restoration. I've never set foot in it, but I go there now; if I fail to come out, go to the Tower and tell your master the time has come to make good on his end of our contract.' The big-bellied servant had seen Daniel approaching and was standing warily at the door. 'I am here to join them,' Daniel snapped, brushing past into the entrance hall. The place had been decorated in the Versailles way, all magnificent, as expensive as possible, and calculated to overawe the Persons of Quality who came here to buy powders and philtres from M. LeFebure. He was not here, having fled the country already. This went a long way toward explaining the fact that the house, tonight, was about as elegant as a fish-market. Servants, and two gentlemen, were bringing goods down from the upper floors, and up from the cellar, dumping them out on tables or floors, and messing through them. After a few moments Daniel realized that one of the gentleman was Robert Boyle and the other Sir Elias Ashmole. Nine things out of ten were tossed in the general direction of the entrance to be hauled out to the fire. The rest were packed in bags and boxes for transport. Transport where, was the question. In the kitchen, a cooper was at work, sealing ancient books up inside of barrels, which suggested a sea-voyage was contemplated by someone. Daniel ascended the stairs, moving purposefully, as if he actually knew his way around the place. In fact, all he had to go on was vague memories of what he'd spied through the telescope twenty years ago. If they served, the room where Upnor and Newton had met was dark-paneled, with many books. Daniel had been having odd dreams about that room for two decades. Now he was finally about to enter it. But he was dead on his feet, so exhausted that everything was little different from a dream anyway. At least a gross of candles were burning in the stairs and the upstairs hall: little point in conserving them now. Cobwebby candelabras had been dragged out of storage, and burdened with mismatched candles, and beeswax tapers had been thrust into frozen wax-splats on expensive polished banisters. A painting of Hermes Trismegistus had been pulled down from its hook and used to prop open the door of a little chamber, a sort of butler's pantry at the top of the stairs, which was mostly dark; but enough light spilled in from the hall that Daniel could see a gaunt man with a prominent nose, and large dark eyes that gave him a sad preoccupied look. He was conversing with someone farther back in the room, whom Daniel could not see. He had crossed his arms, hugging an old book to himself with an index finger thrust into it to save his place. The big eyes turned Daniel's way and regarded him without surprise. 'Good morning, Dr. Waterhouse.' 'Good morning, Mr. Locke. And welcome back from Dutch exile.' 'What news?' 'The King is run to ground at Sheerness. And what of you, Mr. Locke, shouldn't you be writing us a new Constitution or something?' 'I await the pleasure of the Prince of Orange,' said John Locke patiently. 'In the meantime, this house is no worse a place to wait than any other.' 'It is certainly better than where I have been living.' 'We are all in your debt, Dr. Waterhouse.' Daniel turned round and walked five paces down the hall, moving now towards the front of the house, and paused before the large door at the end. He could hear Isaac Newton saying, 'What do we know, truly, of this Viceroy? Supposing he does succeed in conveying it to Spain – will he understand its true value?' Daniel was tempted to stand there for a while listening, but he knew that Locke's eyes were on his back and so he opened the door. Opposite were the three large windows that looked over Charing Cross, covered with scarlet curtains as big as mainsails, lit up by many tapers in sconces and candelabras curiously wrought, like vine-strangled tree-branches turned to solid silver. Daniel had a dizzy sensation of falling into a sea of red light, but his eyes adjusted, and with a slow blink his balance recovered. In the center of the room was a table with a top of black marble shot through with red veins. Two men were seated there, looking up at him: on Daniel's left, the Earl of Upnor, and on his right, Isaac Newton. Posed nonchalantly in the corner of the room, pretending to read a book, was Nicolas Fatio de Duilliers. Daniel immediately, for some reason, saw this through the suspicious eyes of a John Churchill. Here sat a Catholic nobleman who was more at home in Versailles than in London; an Englishman of Puritan upbringing and habits, lately fallen into heresy, the smartest man in the world; and a Swiss Protestant famous for having saved William of Orange from a French plot. Just now they'd been interrupted by a Nonconformist traitor. These differences, which elsewhere sparked duels and wars, counted for naught here; their Brotherhood was somehow above such petty squabbles as the Protestant Reformation and the coming war with France. No wonder Churchill found them insidious. Isaac was a fortnight shy of his forty-sixth birthday. Since his hair had gone white, his appearance had changed very little; he never stopped working to eat or drink and so he was as slender as he had always been, and the only symptom of age was a deepening translucency of his skin, which brought into view tangles of azure veins strewn around his eyes. Like many College dwellers he found it a great convenience to hide his clothing – which was always in a parlous state, being not only worn and shabby but stained and burnt with diverse spirits – underneath an academic robe; but his robe was scarlet, which made him stand out vividly at the College, and here in London all the more so. He did not wear it in the street, but he was wearing it now. He had not affected a wig, so his white hair fell loose over his shoulders. Someone had been brushing that hair. Probably not Isaac. Daniel guessed Fatio. For the Earl of Upnor it had been a challenging couple of decades. He'd been banished once or twice for slaying men in duels, which he did as casually as a stevedore picked his nose. He had gambled away the family's great house in London and been chased off to the Continent for a few years during the most operatic excesses of the so-called Popish Plot. He had, accordingly, muted his dress somewhat. To go with his tall black wig and his thin black moustache he was wearing an outfit that was, fundamentally, black: the de rigueur three-piece suit of waistcoat, coat, and breeches, all in the same fabric – probably a very fine wool. But the whole outfit was crusted over with embroidery done in silver thread, and thin strips of parchment or something had been involved with the needle-work to lift it off the black wool underneath and give it a three-dimensional quality. The effect was as if an extremely fine network of argent vines had grown round his body and now surrounded him and moved with him. He was wearing riding-boots with silver spurs, and was armed with a Spanish rapier whose guard was a tornadic swirl of gracefully curved steel rods with bulbous ends, like a storm of comets spiraling outwards from the grip. Fatio's attire was relatively demure: a many-buttoned sort of cassock, a middling brown wig, a linen shirt, a lace cravat. They were only a little surprised to see him, and no more than normally indignant that he'd burst in without knocking. Upnor showed no sign of wanting to run him through with that rapier. Newton did not seem to think that Daniel's appearing here, now, was any more bizarre than any of the other perceptions that presented themselves to Isaac in a normal day (which was probably true), and Fatio, as always, just observed everything. 'Frightfully sorry to burst in,' Daniel said, 'but I thought you'd like to know that the King's turned up in Sheerness – not above ten miles from Castle Upnor.' The Earl of Upnor now made a visible effort to prevent some strong emotion from assuming control of his face. Daniel couldn't be certain, but he thought it was a sort of incredulous sneer. While Upnor was thus busy, Daniel pressed his advantage: 'The Gentleman of the Bedchamber is in the Presence as we speak, and I suppose that other elements of Court will travel down-river tomorrow, but for now he has nothing – food, drink, a bed are being improvised. As I rode past Castle Upnor yesterday evening, it occurred to me that you might have the means, there, to supply some of His Majesty's wants – ' 'Oh yes,' Upnor said, 'I have all.' 'Shall I make arrangements for a messenger to be sent out then?' 'I can do it myself,' said the Earl. 'Of course I am aware, my lord, that you have the power to dispatch messages. But out of a desire to make myself useful I – ' 'No. I mean, I can deliver the orders myself, for I am on my way to Upnor at daybreak.' 'I beg your pardon, my lord.' 'Is there anything else, Mr. Waterhouse?' 'Not unless I may be of assistance in this house.' Upnor looked at Newton. Newton – who'd been gazing at Daniel – seemed to detect this in the corner of his eye, and spoke: 'In this house, Daniel, a vast repository of alchemical lore has accumulated. Nearly all of it is garbled nonsense. Some of it is true wisdom – secrets that ought rightly to be kept secret from them in whose hands they would be dangerous. Our task is to sort out one from the other, and burn what is useless, and see to it that what is good and true is distributed to the libraries and laboratories of the adept. It is difficult for me to see how you could be of any use in this, since you believe that all of it is nonsense, and have a well-established history of incendiary behavior in the presence of such writings.' 'You continue to view my 1677 actions in the worst possible light.' 'Not so, Daniel. I am aware that you thought you were showering favors on me. Nonetheless, I say that what happened in 1677 must be looked on as permanently disqualifying you from being allowed to handle alchemical literature around open flames.' 'Very well,' said Daniel. 'Good night, Isaac. M'Lord. Monsieur.' Upnor and Fatio were both looking a bit startled by Isaac's cryptic discourse, so Daniel bowed perfunctorily and backed out of the room. They resumed their previous conversation as if Daniel were naught more than a servant who'd nipped in to serve tea. Upnor said, 'Who can guess what notions have got into his head, living for so many years in that land, over-run with the cabals of crypto-Jews, and Indians sacrificing each other atop Pyramids?' 'You could just write him a letter and ask him,' suggested Fatio, in a voice so bright and reasonable that it annoyed even Daniel, who was rapidly backing out of earshot. He could tell, just from this, that Fatio was no alchemist; or if he was, he was new to it, and not yet inculcated to make everything much more obscure and mysterious than it needed to be. He turned around finally, and nearly bumped into a fellow whom he identified, out of the corner of his eye, as a merry monk who had somehow got grievously lost: it was a robed figure gripping a large stoneware tankard that he had evidently taken out on loan from one of the local drinking establishments. 'Have a care, Mr. Waterhouse, you look too little, for listening so well,' said Enoch Root affably. Daniel started away from him. Locke was still standing there embracing his book; Root was the chap he'd been talking to earlier. Daniel was caught off guard for a few moments; Root took advantage of the lull to down a mouthful of ale. 'You are very rude,' Daniel said. 'What did you say? Root?' ' Rude,to drink alone, when others are present.' 'Each man finds his own sort of rudeness. Some burst into houses, and conversations, uninvited.' 'I was bearing important news.' 'And I am celebrating it.' 'Aren't you afraid that drink will shorten your longevity?' 'Is longevity much on your mind, Mr. Waterhouse?' 'It is on the mind of every man. And I am a man. Who or what are you ?' Locke's eyes had been going back and forth, as at a tennis match. Now they fixed on Enoch for a while. Enoch had got a look as if he were trying to be patient – which was not the same as being patient. 'There's a certain unexamined arrogance to your question, Daniel. Just as Newton presumes that there is some absolute space by which all things – comets even! – are measured and governed, you presume it is all perfectly natural and pre-ordained that the earth should be populated by men, whose superstitions ought to be the ruler by which all things are judged; but why might I not ask of you, ‘Daniel Waterhouse, who or what are you? And why does Creation teem with others like you, and what is your purpose?' “ 'I'll remind you, sirrah, that All Hallows' Eve was more than a month since, and I am not of a humour to be baited with hobgoblin-stories.' 'Nor am I of a humour to be rated a hobgoblin or any other figment of the humane imagination; for 'twas God who imagined me, just as He did you, and thereby brought us into being.' 'Your tankard brims over with scorn for our superstitions and imaginings; yet here you are, as always, in the company of Alchemists.' 'You might have said, ‘Here you are in the center of the Glorious Revolution conversing with a noted political philosopher,'' Root returned, glancing at Locke, who flicked his eyes downward in the merest hint of a bow. 'But I am never credited thus by you, Daniel.' 'I have only seen you in the company of alchemists. Do you deny it?' 'Daniel, I have only seen you in the company of alchemists. But I am aware that you do other things. I know you have oft been at Bedlam with Hooke. Perhaps you have seen priests there who go to converse with madmen. Do you suppose those priests to be mad?' 'I'm not sure if I approve of the similitude – ' Locke began. 'Stay, 'Tis just a figure!' Root laughed rather winningly, reaching out to touch Locke's shoulder. 'A faulty one,' Daniel said, 'for you are an alchemist.' 'I am called an Alchemist. Within living memory, Daniel, everyone who studied what I – and you – study was called by that name. And most persons even today observe no distinction between Alchemy and the younger and more vigorous order of knowledge that is associated with your club.' 'I am too exhausted to harry you through all of your evasions. Out of respect for your friends Mr. Locke, and for Leibniz, I shall give you the benefit of the doubt, and wish you well,' Daniel said. 'God save you, Mr. Waterhouse.' 'And you, Mr. Root. But I say this to you – and you as well, Mr. Locke. As I came in here I saw a map, lately taken from this house, burning in the fire. The map was empty, for it depicted the ocean – most likely, a part of it where no man has ever been. A few lines of latitude were ruled across that vellum void, and some legendary isles drawn in, with great authority, and where the map-maker could not restrain himself he drew phantastickal monsters. That map, to me, is Alchemy. It is good that it burnt, and fitting that it burnt tonight, the eve of a Revolution that I will be so bold as to call my life's work. In a few years Mr. Hooke will learn to make a proper chronometer, finishing what Mr. Huygens began thirty years ago, and then the Royal Society will draw maps with lines of longitude as well as latitude, giving us a grid – what we call a Cartesian grid, though 'twas not his idea – and where there be islands, we will rightly draw them. Where there are none, we will draw none, nor dragons, nor sea-monsters – and that will be the end of Alchemy.' ' 'Tis a noble pursuit and I wish you Godspeed,' Root said, 'but remember the poles.' 'The poles?' 'The north and south poles, where your meridians will come together – no longer parallel and separate, but converging, and all one.' 'That is nothing but a figment of geometry.' 'But when you build all your science upon geometry, Mr. Waterhouse, figments become real.' Daniel sighed. 'Very well, perhaps we'll get back to Alchemy in the end – but for now, no one can get near the poles – unless you can fly there on a broom, Mr. Root – and I'll put my trust in geometry and not in the books of fables that Mr. Boyle and Sir Elias are sorting through below. ‘Twill work for me, for the short time I have remaining. I have not time to-night.' 'Further errands await you?' 'I would fain bid a proper farewell to my dear old friend Jeffreys.' 'He is an old friend of the Earl of Upnor as well,' Enoch Root said, a bit distractedly. 'This I know, for they cover up each other's murders.' 'Upnor sent Jeffreys a box a few hours ago.' 'Not to his house, I'll wager.' 'He sent it in care of the master of a ship in the Pool.' 'The name of the ship?' 'I do not know it.' 'The name of the messenger, then?' Enoch Root leaned over the baluster and peered down the middle of the stairwell. 'I do not know that, either,' he said, then shifted his tankard to the other hand so that he could reach out. He pointed at a young porter who was just on his way out the door, bearing another pile of books to the bonfire. 'But it was him. ' HARE RODE AT ANCHOR, LANTERNS a-blaze, before Wapping: a suburb crooked in an elbow of the Thames just downstream of the Tower. If Jeffreys had already boarded her, there was nothing they could do, short of hiring a pirate-ship to overhaul her when she reached blue water. But a few minutes' conversation with the watermen loitering round the Wapping riverfront told them that no passengers had been conveyed to that ship yet. Jeffreys must be waiting for something; but he would wait close by, within view of Hare, so that he could bolt if he had to. And he would choose a place where he could get strong drink, because he was a drunkard. That narrowed it down to some half a dozen taverns, unevenly spaced along the riverbank from the Tower of London down to Shadwell, mostly clustered around the stairs and docks that served as gate-ways ‘tween the Wet and the Dry worlds. Dawn was approaching, and any normal business ought to've been closed half a dozen hours ago. But these dockside taverns served an irregular clientele at irregular hours; they told time by the rise and fall of the tides, not by the comings and goings of the sun. And the night before had been as wild as any in England's history. No sane tavernkeeper would have his doors closed now. 'Let's be about it smartly then, guv'nor,' said Bob Shaftoe, striding off the boat they'd hired near Charing Cross and lighting on King Henry's Stairs. 'This may be nigh on the longest night of the year, but it can't possibly be much longer; and I believe that my Abigail awaits me at Upnor.' This was a gruff way of speaking to a tired sick old Natural Philosopher, yet an improvement on the early days in the Tower, when Bob had been suspicious and chilly, or recent times when he'd been patronizing. When Bob had witnessed John Churchill shaking Daniel's hand on the Tower causeway a few hours earlier, he'd immediately begun addressing him as 'guv'nor.' But he'd persisted in his annoying habit of asking Daniel whether he was tired or sick until just a quarter of an hour ago, when Daniel had insisted that they shoot one of the flumes under London Bridge rather than take the time to walk around. It was the first time in Daniel's life that he'd run this risk, the second time for Bob, and the fourth time for the waterman. A hill of water had piled up on the upstream side of the bridge and was finding its way through the arches like a panicked crowd trying to bolt from a burning theatre. The boat's mass was but a millionth part of it, and was of no account whatever; it spun around like a weathercock at the brink of the cataract, bashed against the pilings below Chapel Pier hard enough to stave in the gunwale, spun round the opposite way from the recoil, and accelerated through the flume sideways, rolling toward the downstream side so that it scooped up a ton or so of water. Daniel had imagined doing this since he'd been a boy, and had always wondered what it would be like to look up and see the Bridge from underneath; but by the time he thought to raise his gaze outside the narrow and dire straits of the boat, they'd been thrust half a mile downstream and were passing right by the Traitor's Gate once more. This act had at last convinced Bob that Daniel was a man determined to kill himself this very night, and so he now dispensed with all of the solicitous offers; he let Daniel jump off the boat under his own power, and did not volunteer to bear him piggy-back up King Henry's Stairs. Up they trudged into Wapping, river-water draining in gallons from their clothes, and the waterman – who'd been well paid – was left to bail his boat. They tried four taverns before they came to the Red Cow. It was half wrecked from the past night's celebrations, but efforts were underway to shovel it out. This part of the riverfront was built up only thinly, with one or two strata of inns and warehouses right along the river, crowding in against a main street running direct to the Tower a mile away. Beyond that 'twas green fields. So the Red Cow offered Daniel juxtapositions nearly as strange as what he'd witnessed in Sheerness: viz. one milkmaid, looking fresh and pure as if angels had just borne her in from a dewy Devonshire pasture-ground, carrying a pail of milk in the back door, stepping primly over a peg-legged Portuguese seaman who'd passed out on a heap of straw embracing a drained gin-bottle. This and other particulars, such as the Malay-looking gent smoking bhang by the front door, gave Daniel the feeling that the Red Cow merited a thoroughgoing search. As on a ship when exhausted sailors climb down from the yards and go to hammocks still warm from the men who replace them, so the late-night drinkers were straggling out, and their seats being taken by men of various watery occupations who were nipping in for a drink and a nibble. But there was one bloke in the back corner who did not move. He was dark, saturnine, a lump of lead on a plank, his face hidden in shadow – either completely unconscious or extremely alert. His hand was curled round a glass on the table in front of him, the pose of one who needs to sit for many hours, and who justifies it by pretending he still nurses his drink. Light fell onto his hand from a candle. His thumb was a-tremble. Daniel went to the bar at the opposite corner of the room, which was little bigger than a crow's nest. He ordered one dram, and paid for ten. 'Yonder bloke,' he said, pointing with his eyes, 'I'll lay you a quid he is a common man – common as the air.' The tavernkeeper was a fellow of about three score, as pure-English as the milkmaid, white-haired and red-faced. 'It'd be thievery for me to take that wager, for you've only seen his clothes – which are common – while I've heard his voice – which is anything but.' 'Then, a quid says he has a disposition sweet as clotted cream.' The tavernkeeper looked pained. 'It slays me to turn your foolish bets away, but again, I have such knowledge to the contrary as would make it an unfair practice.' 'I'll bet you a quid he has the most magnificent set of eyebrows you've ever seen – eyebrows that would serve for pot-scrubbers.' 'When he came in he kept his hat pulled down low, and his head bowed – I didn't see his eyebrows – I'd say you've got yourself a wager, sir.' 'Do you mind?' 'Be at your ease, sir, I'll send my boy round to be the judge of it – if you doubt, you may send a second.' The tavernkeeper turned and caught a lad of ten years or so by the arm, bent down, and spoke to him for a few moments. The boy went directly to the man in the corner and spoke a few words to him, gesturing toward the glass; the man did not even deign to answer, but merely raised one hand as if to cuff the boy. A heavy gold ring caught the light for an instant. The boy came back and said something in slang so thick Daniel couldn't follow. 'Tommy says you owe me a pound then,' the tavernkeeper said. Daniel sagged. 'His eyebrows were not bushy?' 'That wasn't the wager. His eyebrows are not bushy, that was the wager. Were not bushy, that's neither here nor there!' 'I don't follow.' 'I've a blackthorn shillelagh behind this counter that was witness to our wager, and it says you owe me that quid, never mind your weasel-words!' 'You may let your shillelagh doze where it is, sir,' Daniel said, 'I'll let you have that quid. I only ask that you explain yourself.' 'Bushy eyebrows he might have had yesterday, for all I know,' the tavernkeeper said, calming down a little, 'but as we speak, he has no eyebrows at all. Only stubble.' 'He cut them off!' 'It is not my place to speculate, sir.' 'Here's your pound.' 'Thank you, sir, but I would prefer one of full weight, made of silver, not this counterfeiter's amalgam . . .' 'Stay. I can give you better.' 'A better coin? Let's have it then.' 'No, a better circumstance. How would you like this place to be famous, for a hundred years or more, as the place where an infamous murderer was brought to justice?' Now it was the tavernkeeper's turn to deflate. It was clear from his face that he'd much rather not have any infamous murderers at all in the house. But Daniel spoke encouraging words to him, and got him to send the boy running up the street toward the Tower, and to stand at the back exit with the shillelagh. A look sufficed to get Bob Shaftoe on his feet, near the front door. Then Daniel took a fire-brand out of the hearth and carried it across the room, and finally waved it back and forth so that it flared up and filled the dark corner with light. 'Damned be to Hell, you shit, Daniel Waterhouse! Traitorous, bastard whore, pantaloon-pissing coward! How dare you impose on a nobleman thus! By what authority! I'm a baron, as you are a sniveling turncoat, and William of Orange is no Cromwell, no Republican, but a prince, a nobleman like me! He'll show me the respect I merit, and you the contempt you deserve, and 'Tis you who'll feel Jack Ketch's blade on his neck, and die like a whipped bitch in the Tower as you should've done!' Daniel turned to address the other guests in the tavern – not so much the comatose dregs of last night as the breakfasting sailors and watermen. 'I apologize for the disruption,' he announced. 'You have heard of Jeffreys, the Hanging Judge, the one who decorated trees in Dorset with bodies of ordinary Englishmen, who sold English schoolgirls into chattel slavery?' Jeffreys got to his feet, knocking his table over, and made for the closest exit, which was at the rear; but the tavernkeeper raised the shillelagh in both hands and wound up like a woodman preparing to swing his axe at a tree. Jeffreys shambled to a stop and reversed direction, heading for the front of the room. Bob Shaftoe let him build to full speed, and let him enjoy a few seconds' hope, before side-stepping in front of the doorway and whipping a dagger out of his boot. It was all Jeffreys could do to stop before impaling himself on it; and the casual look on Bob's face made it clear he would not have turned the point aside. The men in the tavern had all got to their feet now and begun reaching into their clothes, betraying locations of various daggers, coshes, and other necessaries. But they did this because they were confused, not because they'd formed any clear intentions. For that, they were still looking to Daniel. 'The man I speak of, whose name you have all heard, the man who is responsible for the Bloody Assizes and many other crimes besides – judicial murders, for which he has never dreamed he would be made to pay, until this moment – George Jeffreys, Baron of Wem, is he. ' And Daniel pointed his finger like a pistol into the face of Jeffreys, whose eyebrows would have shot up in horror, if he still had any. As it was, his face was strangely devoid of expression, of its old power to stir Daniel's emotions. Nothing he could do with that face could now make Daniel fear him, or pity him, or be charmed by him. This was attributing more power to a set of eyebrows than was really sensible, and so it had to be something else instead; some change in Jeffreys, or in Daniel. The daggers and coshes had begun to come out – not to be used, but to keep Jeffreys hemmed in. Jeffreys was speechless for the first time since Daniel had known him. He could not even curse. Daniel met Bob's eyes, and nodded. 'Godspeed, Sergeant Shaftoe, I hope you rescue your princess.' 'So do I,' Bob said, 'but whether I live or die in the attempt, do not forget that I have helped you; but you have not helped me yet.' 'I have not forgotten it, nor will I ever. Chasing armed men cross-country is not something I am very good at, or I would come with you now. I await a chance to return the favor.' 'It is not a favor, but one side of a contract,' Bob reminded him, 'and all that remains is for us to choose the coin in which I shall be repaid.' He turned and bolted into the street. Jeffreys looked around, taking a quick census of the men and weapons closing in around him, and finally turned his gaze on Daniel: not fierce any more, but offended, and bewildered – as if asking why? Why go to the trouble? I was running away! What is the point of this? Daniel looked him in the eye and said the first thing that entered his mind: 'You and I are but earth.' Then he walked out into the city. The sun was coming up now, and soldiers were running down the street from the Tower, led by a boy. Venice Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) JULY 1689 The Venetian Republick began thus; a despicable Croud of People flying from the Fury of the Barbarians which over-run the Roman Empire, took Shelter in a few inaccessible Islands of the Adriatic Gulph . . . THEIR City we see raised to a prodigious Splendour and Magnificence, and their rich Merchants rank'd among the ancient Nobility, and all this by Trade. – Daniel Defoe, A Plan of the English Commerce To Eliza, Countess de la Zeur and Duchess of Qwghlm From G. W. Leibniz July 1689 Eliza, Your misgivings about the Venetian Post Office have once again proved unfounded – your letter reached me quickly and without obvious signs of tampering. Really, I think that you have been spending too much time in the Hague, for you are becoming as prim and sanctimonious as a Dutchwoman. You need to come here and visit me. Then you would see that even the most debauched people in the world have no difficulty delivering the mail on time, and doing many other difficult things besides. As I write these words I am seated near a window that looks out over a canal, and two gondoliers, who nearly collided a minute ago, are screaming murderous threats at each other. This sort of thing happens all the time here. The Venetians have even given it a name: 'Canal Rage.' Some say that it is a new phenomenon – they insist that gondoliers never used to scream at each other in this way. To them it is a symptom of the excessively rapid pace of change in the modern world, and they make an analogy to poisoning by quicksilver, which has turned so many alchemists into shaky, irritable lunatics. The view from this window has changed very little in hundreds of years (God knows that my room could use some maintenance), but the letters scattered across my table (all delivered punctually by Venetians) tell of changes the like of which the world has not seen since Rome fell and the Vagabond Emperor moved his court to this city. Not only have William and Mary been crowned at Westminster (as you and several others were so kind as to inform me), but in the same post I received word from Sophie Charlotte in Berlin that there is a new Tsar in Russia, named Peter, and that he is as tall as Goliath, as strong as Samson, and as clever as Solomon. The Russians have signed a treaty with the Emperor of China, fixing their common border along some river that does not even appear on the maps – but from all accounts, Russia now extends all the way to the Pacific, or (depending on which set of maps you credit) to America. Perhaps this Peter could march all the way to Massachusetts without getting his feet wet! But Sophie Charlotte says that the new Tsar's gaze is fixed westwards. She and her incomparable mother are already scheming to invite him to Berlin and Hanover so that they can flirt with him in person. I would not miss that for the world; but Peter has many rivals to crush and Turks to slay before he can even consider such a journey, and so I should have plenty of time to make my way back from Venice. Meanwhile this city looks to the east – the Venetians and the other Christian armies allied with them continue to press the Turks back, and no one here will talk about anything else but the news that came in the latest post, or when the next post is expected. For those of us more interested in philosophy, it makes for tedious dinners! The Holy League have taken Lipova, which as you must know is the gateway to Transylvania, and there is hope of driving the Turks all the way to the Black Sea before long. And in a month I'll be able to write you another letter containing the same sentence with a different set of incomprehensible place names. Woe to the Balkans. Pardon me if I seem flippant. Venice seems to have that effect on me. She finances her wars the old-fashioned way, by levying taxes on trade, and this naturally limits their scope. By contrast, the reports I hear from England and from France are most disquieting. First you tell me that (according to your sources at Versailles) Louis XIV is melting down the silver furniture in the Grands Appartements to pay for the raising of an even vaster army (or perhaps he wanted to redecorate). Next, Huygens writes from London that the Government there has hit upon the idea of financing the Army and Navy by creating a national debt – using all of England as collateral, and levying a special tax that is earmarked for paying it back. I can scarcely picture the upheaval that these innovations must have created in Amsterdam! Huygens also mentioned that the ship he took across the North Sea was crowded with Amsterdam Jews who appeared to be bringing their entire households and estates with them to London. No doubt some of the silver that used to be part of Louis' favorite armchair has by this route made its way via the ghetto of Amsterdam to the Tower of London where it has been minted into new coins bearing the likeness of William and Mary, and then been sent out to pay for the building of new warships at Chatham. Thus far, in these parts, Louis' declaration of war against England seems to have had little effect. The duc d'Arcachon's navy is dominant in the Mediterranean, and is rumored to have taken many Dutch and English merchantmen around Smyrna and Alexandria, but there have not been any pitched sea-battles that I know of. Likewise, James II is said to have landed in Ireland whence he hopes to launch attacks on England, but I have no news thence. My chief concern is for you, Eliza. Huygens gave me a good description of you. He was touched that you and those royals you have befriended – the Princess Eleanor and little Caroline – went to the trouble of seeing him off on his voyage to London, especially given that you were quite enormously pregnant at the time. He used various astronomical metaphors to convey your roundness, your hugeness, your radiance, and your beauty. His affection for you is obvious, and I believe he is a touch saddened that he is not the father (who is , by the way? Remember I am in Venice, you may tell me anything and I cannot be shocked by it). At any rate – knowing how strongly you are attracted to the financial markets, I fret that the recent upheavals have drawn you into the furor of the Damplatz, which would be no place for one in a delicate condition. But there is little point in my worrying about it now, for by this time you must have entered into your confinement, and you and your baby must have emerged dead or alive, and gone to the nursery or the grave; I pray both of you are in the nursery, and whenever I see a picture of the Madonna and child (which in Venice is about three times a minute) I phant'sy it is a fair portrait of you and yours. Likewise I send my prayers and best wishes to the Princesses. Their story was pathetic even before they were made into refugees by the war. It is good that in the Hague they have found a safe harbor, and a friend such as you to keep them company. But the news from the Rhine front – Bonn and Mainz changing hands, &c. – suggests that they shall not soon be able to return to that place where they were living out their exile. You ask me a great many questions about Princess Eleanor, and your curiosity has aroused mine; you remind me of a merchant who is considering a momentous transaction with someone she does not know very well, and who is casting about for references. I have not met Princess Eleanor, only heard strangely guarded descriptions of her beauty (e.g., 'she is the most beautiful German princess'). I did know her late husband, the Margrave John Frederick of Brandenburg-Ansbach. As a matter of fact I was thinking of him the other day, because the new Tsar in Russia is frequently described in the same terms as were once applied to Eleanor's late husband: forward-thinking, modern-minded, obsessed with securing his country's position in the new economic order. Caroline's father went out of his way to welcome Huguenots or anyone else he thought had unusual skills, and tried to make Ansbach into a center of what your friend and mine, Daniel Waterhouse, likes to call the Technologickal Arts. But he wrote novels too, did the late John Frederick, and you know of my shameful weakness for those. He loved music and the theatre. It is a shame that smallpox claimed him, and a crime that his own son made Eleanor feel so unwelcome there that she left town with little Caroline. Beyond those facts, which are known to all, all I can offer you concerning these two Princesses is gossip. However, my gossip is copious, and of the most excellent quality. For Eleanor figures into the machinations of Sophie and Sophie Charlotte, and so her name is mentioned from time to time in the letters that fly to and fro between Hanover and Berlin. I do believe that Sophie and Sophie Charlotte are trying to organize some sort of North German super-state. Such a thing can never exist without princes; German Protestant princes and princesses are in short supply, and getting shorter as the war goes on; beautiful princesses who lack husbands are, therefore, exceptionally precious. If precious Eleanor were rich she could command, or at least influence, her own destiny. But because her falling-out with her stepson has left her penniless, her only assets are her body and her daughter. Because her body has shown the ability to manufacture little princes, it is enfeoffed to larger powers. I shall be surprised if a few years from now, your friend Princess Eleanor is not dwelling in Hanover or Brandenburg, married to some more or less hideous German royal. I would advise her to seek out one of the madly eccentric ones, as this will at least make her life more interesting. I hope that I do not sound callous, but these are the facts of the matter. It is not as bad as it sounds. They are in the Hague. They will be safe there from the atrocities being committed against Germans by the army of Louvois. More dazzling cities exist, but the Hague is perfectly serviceable, and a great improvement over the rabbit-hutch in the Thüringer Wald where, according to gossip, Eleanor and Caroline have been holed up for the last few years. Best of all, as long as they remain in the Hague, Princess Caroline is being exposed to you, Eliza, and learning how to be a great woman. Whatever may befall Eleanor at the hands of those two redoubtable match-makers, Sophie and Sophie Charlotte, Caroline will, I believe, learn from you and from them how to manage her affairs in such a way that, when she reaches a marriageable age, she shall be able to choose whatever Prince and whatever Realm are most suitable to her. And this will provide comfort to Eleanor in her old age. As for Sophie, she will never be satisfied with Germany alone – her uncle was King of England and she would be its Queen. Did you know she speaks perfect English? So here I am, far away from home, trying to track down every last one of her husband's ancestors among the Guelphs and the Ghibellines. Ah, Venice! Every day I get down on my knees and thank God that Sophie and Ernst August are not descended from people who lived in some place like Lipova. At any rate, I hope you, Eleanor, Caroline, and, God willing, your baby are all well, and being looked after by officious Dutch nurses. Do write as soon as you feel up to it. Leibniz P.S. I am so annoyed by Newton's mystical approach to force that I am developing a new discipline to study that subject alone. I am thinking of calling it 'dynamics,' which derives from the Greek word for force – what do you think of the name? For I may know Greek backwards and forwards, but you have taste. The Hague AUGUST 1689 Dear Doctor, 'Dynamics' makes me think not only of force, but of Dynasties, which use forces, frequently concealed, to maintain themselves – as the Sun uses forces of a mysterious nature to make the planets pay court to him. So I think that the name has a good ring to it, especially since you are becoming such an expert on Dynasties new and old, and are so adept at balancing great forces against each other. And insofar as words are names for things, and naming gives a kind of power to the namer, then you are very clever to make your objections to Newton's work a part of the very name of your new discipline. I would only warn you that the frontier between 'ingenious' (which is held to be a good quality) and 'clever' (which is looked at a-skance) is as ill-defined as most of the boundaries in Christendom are today. Englishmen are particularly distrustful of cleverness, which is odd, because they are so clever, and they are wont to draw the boundary in such a way as to encompass all the works of Newton (or any other Englishman) in the country called 'ingenious' while leaving you exiled to 'clever.' And the English must be attended to because they seem to be drawing all the maps. Huygens went to be among the Royal Society because he felt it was the only place in the world (outside of whatever room you happen to be in) where he could have a conversation that would not bore him to death. And despite the never-ending abuse from Mr. Hooke, he never wants to leave. I have been slow to write about myself. This is partly because the very existence of this letter proves, well enough, that I live. But it is also because I can hardly bring myself to write about the baby – may God have mercy on his little soul. For by now, he is with the angels in Heaven. After several false starts my labor began in the evening of the 27th of June, which I think was extremely late – certainly I felt as if I had been pregnant for two years! It was early the next morning that my bag of waters broke and poured out like a flood from a broken dam.*Now things became very busy at the Binnenhof as the apparatus of labor and delivery swung into action. Doctors, nurses, midwives, and clergy were summoned, and every gossip within a radius of five miles went to the highest state of alert. As you have guessed, the incredibly tedious descriptions of labors and deliveries that follow are nothing but the vessel for this encrypted message. But you should read them anyway because it took me several drafts and a gallon of ink to put into words one one-hundredth of the agony, the endless rioting in my viscera as my body tried to rip itself open. Imagine swallowing a melon-seed, feeling it grow in your belly to full size, and then trying to vomit it up through the same small orifice. Thank God the baby is finally out. But pray for God to help me, for I love him. Yes, I say 'love,' not 'loved.' Contrary to what is written in the unencrypted text, the baby lives. But I get ahead of myself. For reasons that will shortly become obvious, you must destroy this letter. That is, if I don't destroy it first by dissolving the words with my tears. Sorry about the unsightly blotching. To the Dutch and the English, I am the Duchess of Qwghlm. To the French, I am the Countess de la Zeur. But neither a Protestant Duchess nor a French Countess can get away with bearing and rearing a child out of wedlock. My pregnancy I was able to conceal from all but a few, for once I began to show, I ventured out in public only rarely. For the most part I confined myself to the upper storys of the house of Huygens. So it has been a tedious spring and summer. The Princesses of Ansbach, Eleanor and Caroline, have been staying as honored guests of the Prince of Orange at the Binnenhof, which as you know is separated from the Huygens house by only a short distance. Almost every day they strolled across the square to pay a call on me. Or rather Eleanor strolled, and Caroline sprinted ahead. To give a curious six-year-old the run of such a place, cluttered as it is with Huygens's clocks, pendulums, lenses, prisms, and other apparatus, is a joy for the little one and a deadly trial for all adults within the sound of her voice. For she can ask a hundred questions about even the least interesting relic that she digs up from some corner. Eleanor, who knows practically nothing of Natural Philosophy, quickly wearied of saying 'I don't know' over and over again, and became reluctant to visit the place. But I had nothing better to do with my time as the baby grew, and was hungry for their company, and so attended closely to Caroline and tried as best I could to give some answer to every one of her questions. Perceiving this, Eleanor got in the habit of withdrawing to a sunny corner to do embroidery or write a letter. Sometimes she would leave Caroline with me and go out riding or attend a soiree. So the arrangement worked out well for all three of us. You mentioned to me, Doctor, that the late Margrave John Frederick, Caroline's father, had a passion for Natural Philosophy and Technologickal Arts. I can now assure you that Caroline has inherited this trait; or perhaps she has dim memories of her father showing off his fossil collection or his latest pendulum-clock, and so feels some communion with his departed soul when I show her the wonders of Huygens's house. If so it is a tale that will seem familiar to you, who knew your father only by exploring his library. Thus Eliza and Caroline. But too Eliza and Eleanor have been talking, late at night, when Caroline is asleep in her bedchamber in the Binnenhof. We have been talking about Dynamics. Not the dynamics of rolling balls on inclined planes, but the dynamics of royal and noble families. She and I are both a little bit like mice scurrying around on a bowling-green, trying not to be crushed by the rolling and colliding balls. We must understand dynamics in order to survive. Only a few months before I became pregnant, I visited London. I was at Whitehall Palace with Daniel Waterhouse when the son of James II – now Pretender to the throne – was supposedly born. Was Mary of Modena really pregnant, or only stuffing pillows under her dress? If she was pregnant, was it really by the syphilitic King James II, or was a healthy stud brought in to the royal apartments to father a robust heir? Supposing she was really pregnant, did the baby survive childbirth? Or was the babe brought forth from that room really an orphan, smuggled into Whitehall in a warming-pan, and triumphantly brought forth so that the Stuart line could continue to reign over England? In one sense it does not matter, since that king is deposed, and that baby is being reared in Paris. But in another sense it matters very much, for the latest news from across the sea is that the father has taken Derry, and is on the march elsewhere in Ireland, trying to win his kingdom back for his son. All because of what did or did not happen in a certain birthing-room at Whitehall. But I insult your intelligence by belaboring this point. Have you found any changelings or bastards in Sophie's line? Probably. Have you made these facts known? Of course not. But burn this anyway, and sift the ashes into that canal you are always writing about, making sure beforehand that there are no ill-tempered gondoliers beneath your window. As a Christian noblewoman, never married, I could not be pregnant, and could not have a child. Eleanor knew this as well as I. We talked about it for hours and hours as my belly grew larger and larger. My pregnancy was hardly a secret – various servants and women of the household knew – but I could deny it later. Gossips would know I was lying, but in the end, they are of no account. If, God forbid, the baby was stillborn, or died in infancy, then it would be as if it had never happened. But if the baby throve, then matters would be complicated. Those complications did not really daunt me. If there was one thing I learned at Versailles, it was that Persons of Quality have as many ways of lying about their affairs, perversions, pregnancies, miscarriages, births, and bastards as sailors have of tying knots. As the months of my pregnancy clunked past, ponderous but inexorable, like one of Huygens's pendulums, I had some time to consider which lie I would choose to tell when my baby was born. Early, when my belly was just a bit swollen, I considered giving the baby away. As you know, there are plenty of well-funded 'orphanages' where illegitimate children of the Quality are raised. Or if I searched long enough I might find some decent mother and father who were barren, and would be more than happy to welcome a healthy infant into their house. But on the first day that the baby began to kick inside of me, the idea of giving him away faded to an abstraction, and shortly vanished from my mind. When I reached my seventh month, Eleanor sent to Eisenach for a certain Frau Heppner. Frau Heppner arrived some weeks later, claiming to be a nurse who would look after Princess Caroline and teach her the German language. And this she did; but in truth, Frau Heppner is a midwife. She delivered Eleanor, and has delivered many other noble and common babies since then. Eleanor said that she was loyal and that her discretion could be relied on. The Binnenhof, though far from luxurious by the standards of French palaces, contains several suites of apartments, each appointed in such a way that a royal house guest can dwell there in the company of her ladies-in-waiting, Lady of the Bedchamber, &c. As you will understand from my earlier letters, Princess Eleanor did not have enough of a household to occupy a suite fully; she had a couple of servants who had come out from Eisenach, and two Dutch girls who'd been assigned to her, by William's household staff, as an act of charity. And now she had Frau Heppner. This still left an empty room in her suite. And so, when Frau Heppner was not giving Caroline lessons, she began organizing the bedsheets and other necessaries of the midwife's art, making that extra room into a birthing-chamber. The plan was that when I went into labor I would be carried across the square into the Binnenhof in a sedan-chair, and taken direct to Eleanor's suite. We practiced this, if you can believe such a thing: I hired a pair of brawny Dutchmen to serve as porters, and once a day, during the final weeks of my pregnancy, had them carry me from Huygens's house to the Binnenhof, not stopping or slowing until they had set the sedan chair down inside Eleanor's bedchamber. These dress rehearsals seemed a good idea at the time, because I did not know the strength of my enemy, and the number of his spies in the Binnenhof. In retrospect, I was telling him everything about my plan, and giving him all he needed to lay a perfect ambush. But again I get ahead of myself. The plan was that Frau Heppner would preside over the delivery. If the baby died and I lived, no word of it need ever leave that chamber. If I died and the infant lived, it would become a ward of Eleanor, and inherit my wealth. If both I and the baby survived, then I would recuperate for a few weeks and then move to London as soon as the obvious symptoms of childbirth were gone from my body. I would bring the infant along with me, and pass it off as an orphaned niece or nephew, the sole survivor of some massacre in the Palatinate. There is no shortage of massacres to choose from, and no want of Englishmen who would be eager to credit such a tale be it never so patchy – particularly if the tale came from a Duchess who had been of great service to their new King. Yes, it all sounds absurd. I never would have dreamed such things went on if I had not gone to Whitehall and seen (from a distance) the retinue of high and mighty persons gathered there for no reason other than to stand in the Queen's bedchamber and stare fixedly at her vagina all day, like villagers at a magic-show, determined to catch the magician out in some sleight-of-hand. I supposed that my own vagina, so humble and common, would never draw such a large and distinguished audience. So by making some simple arrangements ahead of time, I should be able to adjust matters to my satisfaction after it was over. You may refer to the plaintext now, doctor, to become acquainted with all of the delightful sensations that preoccupied me during my first several hours of labor (I assume it was several hours; at first 'twas dark outside and then light). When my bag of waters broke, and I knew that the time had come, I sent word for the porters. Between contractions, I made my way carefully downstairs and climbed into the sedan chair, which was kept waiting in a room at the side of the house, at street-level. Once I was inside the box, I closed the door, and drew the curtains across the little windows, so that curious eyes should not look in on me as I was taken across the square. The darkness and confinement did not really trouble me, considering that the baby inside my womb had been living with far worse for many weeks, and had suffered it patiently, aside from a few kicks. Presently I heard the familiar voices of the porters outside, and felt the sedan being lifted into the air, and rotated around in the street for the short journey to the Binnenhof. This passed without incident. I believe that I may have dozed a little bit. Certainly I lost track of the twists and turns, after a while, as they carried me down the long galleries of the Binnehof. But soon enough I felt the sedan being set down on a stone floor, and heard the porters walking away. I reached up, flipped the door-latch, and pushed it open, expecting to see the faces of Frau Heppner, Eleanor, and Caroline. Instead I was looking at the face of Dr. Alkmaar, the court physician, a man I had seen once or twice, but never spoken to. I was not in Eleanor's apartment. It was an unfamiliar bedchamber, somewhere else in the Binnenhof. A bed was ready – ready for me! – and a steaming vat of water rested on the floor, and piles of torn sheets had been put in position. There were some women in the room, whom I knew a little, and a young man I'd never seen at all. It was a trap; but so shocking that I did not know what to do. Would that I could tell you, Doctor, that I kept my wits about me, and perceived all that was going on, and jumped out of the sedan chair and ran down the gallery to freedom. But in truth, I was perfectly dumbfounded. And at the moment that I found myself in this unfamiliar room, I was taken by a strong contraction, which made me helpless. By the time that the pangs had subsided, I was lying in that bed; Dr. Alkmaar and the others had pulled me out of the sedan chair. The porters were long since gone. Whoever had arranged this ambush – and I had a good idea of who it was – had either paid them to take me to the wrong room, or somehow talked them into believing that this was what I wanted. I had no way to send out a message. I could scream for help, but women in labor always scream for help. There was plenty of help already in the room. Dr. Alkmaar was far from being a warm person, but he was reputed competent and (almost as important) loyal. If he spied on me (which was only to be expected) he would tell my secrets to William of Orange, who knows my secrets anyway. Dr. Alkmaar was assisted by one of his pupils (the young man) and by two girls who had no real business being in this room. When I had arrived in the Hague almost nine months before, in a canal-boat with Eleanor and Caroline, William had tried to furnish me with the rudiments of a household, befitting my exalted rank. The Prince of Orange did this not because I desired it but because it is how things are done, and it seemed absurd to have a Duchess in residence at a royal palace who was bereft of servants and staff. He sent me two young women. Both were daughters of minor nobles, serving time at Court, awaiting husbands, and wishing they were at Versailles instead. Since being spied on by members of one's household is the staple of palace intrigue, I had been careful to have all of my conversations with Eleanor in places where neither of these two girls could possibly overhear us. Later I had moved to Huygens's house, dismissed them from my service, and forgotten about them. But by some narrow definition of Court protocol, they were still technically members of my household, whether I wanted them or not. My fogged mind, trying to make sense of these events, cast that up as an explanation. Again refer to plaintext for description of various agonies and indignities. The point, for purposes of this narration, is that when the worst fits came over me, I was not really conscious. If you doubt it, Doctor, eat some bad oysters and then try doing some of your calculus at the moment your insides try to turn themselves inside out. At the conclusion of one of these fits I gazed down through half-closed eyes at Dr. Alkmaar, who was standing between my thighs with his sleeve rolled up and his armhairs plastered to his skin by some sort of wetness. I inferred that he had been inside me, doing a little exploration.' “It's a boy,' he announced, more for the benefit of the spectators than for me – I could tell from the way they looked at me that they thought I was asleep or delirious. I opened my eyes slightly, thinking that it was all over, wanting to see the baby. But Dr. Alkmaar was empty-handed and he was not smiling. “How do you know?' asked Brigitte – one of those two girls who made up my household. Brigitte looked like she belonged in a Dutch farm-yard operating a butter churn. In Court dress she looked big and out of place. She was harmless. “He is trying to come out buttocks-first,' Dr. Alkmaar said distractedly. Brigitte gasped. Despite the bad news, I took comfort from this. I had found Brigitte tedious and stupid because of her sweetness. Now, she was the only person in the room feeling sympathy for me. I wanted to get out of bed and hug her, but it did not seem practical. Marie – the other girl – said, 'That means both of them will die, correct?' Now, Doctor, since I am writing this letter, there is no point in my trying to keep you in suspense – obviously I did not die. I mention this as a way of conveying something about the character of this girl Marie. In contrast to Brigitte, who was always warm (if thick-seeming), Marie had an icy soul – if a mouse ran into the room, she would stomp it to death. She was the daughter of a baron, with a pedigree pieced together from the dribs, drabs, fag-ends, and candle-stubs of diverse Dutch and German principalities, and she struck me (by your leave) as one who had issued from a family where incest was practiced often and early. Dr. Alkmaar corrected her: 'It means I must reach up and rotate the baby until it is head-down. The danger is that the umbilical cord will squirt out while I am doing this, and get throttled later. The chief difficulty is the contractions of her uterus, which bear down on the infant with more strength than my arms, or any man's, can match. I must wait for her womb to relax and then try it.' So we waited. But even in the intervals between my contractions, my womb was so tense that Dr. Alkmaar could not budge the infant. 'I have drugs that might help,' he mused, 'or I could bleed her to make her weaker. But it would be better to wait for her to become completely exhausted. Then I might have a better chance.' More delay now – for them it was a matter of standing around waiting for time to pass, for me it was to be a victim of bloody murder and then to return to life again, over and over; but a lower form of life each time. By the time the messenger burst in, I could only lie there like a sack of potatoes and listen to what was said. “Doctor Alkmaar! I have just come from the bedside of the Chevalier de Montluçon!' “And why is the new ambassador in bed at four in the afternoon?' “He has suffered an attack of some sort and urgently requires your assistance to bleed him!' “I am occupied,' said Dr. Alkmaar, after thinking about it. But I found it disturbing that he had to mull it over in this way. “A midwife is on her way to take over your work here,' said the messenger. As if on cue, there was a knock at the door. Showing more vitality than she had all day, Marie dashed over and flung it open to reveal a certain crone of a midwife, a woman with a very mixed reputation. Peering out through a haze of eyelashes I could see Marie throwing her arms around the midwife's neck with a little cry of simulated joy, and muttering something into her ear. The midwife listened and said something back, listened and said something back, three times before she ever turned her colorless gray eyes towards me, and when she did, I felt death reaching for me. “Tell me more of the symptoms,' said Dr. Alkmaar, beginning to take an interest in this new case. The way he was looking at me – staring without seeing – I sensed he was giving up. I mustered the strength to lever myself up on one elbow, and reached out to grab the bloody cravat around Dr. Alkmaar's neck. 'If you think I am dead, explain this!' I said, giving him a violent jerk. “It will be hours before you will have become exhausted enough,' he said. 'I shall have time to go and bleed the Chevalier de Montluçon – “ “Who will then suffer another attack, and then another!' I replied. 'I am not a fool. I know that if I become so exhausted that you are able to turn the baby around in my womb, I shall be too weak to push her out. Tell me of the drug you mentioned before!' “Doctor, the French Ambassador may be dying! The rules of precedence dictate that – ' began Marie, but Dr. Alkmaar held up one hand to stay her. To me, he said, 'It is but a sample. It relaxes certain muscles for a time, then it wears off.' “Have you experimented with it yet?' “Yes.' “And?' “It made me unable to hold in my urine.' “Who gave it to you?' “A wandering alchemist who came to visit two weeks ago.' “A fraud or – “ “He is well reputed. He remarked that, with so many pregnant women in the house, I might have need of it.' “'Twas the Red?' Dr. Alkmaar's eyes darted from side to side before he answered with a very slight nod. “Give me the drug.' It was some sort of plant extract, very bitter, but after about a quarter of an hour it made me go all loose in the joints, and I became light-headed even though I had not lost that much blood yet. So I was not fully conscious when Dr. Alkmaar did the turning, and that suited me, as it was not anything I wanted to be conscious of. My passion for Natural Philosophy has its limits. I heard him saying to the midwife, 'Now the baby is head down, as it should be. God be praised, the cord did not emerge. The baby is crowning now, and when the drug wears off in a few hours, the contractions will resume and, God willing, she will deliver normally. Know that she is delivering late; the baby is well-developed; as frequently occurs in such cases, it has already defecated inside the womb.' “I have seen it before,' said the midwife, a little bit insulted. Dr. Alkmaar did not care whether she was insulted or not: 'The baby has got some of it into his mouth. There is danger that when he draws his first breath he shall aspirate it into his lungs. If that happens he shall not live to the end of the week. I was able to get my finger into the little one's mouth and clear out a good deal of it, but you must remember to hold him head-down when he emerges and clear the mouth again before he inhales.' “I am in debt to your wisdom, Doctor,' said the midwife bitterly. “You felt around in his mouth?The baby's mouth?' Marie asked him. “That is what I have just said,' Dr. Alkmaar replied. “Was it . . . normal?' “What do you mean?' “The palate . . . the jaw . . . ?' “Other than being full of baby shit,' said Dr. Alkmaar, picking up his bag of lancets and handing it to his assistant, 'it was normal. Now I go to bleed the French Ambassador.' “Take a few quarts for me, Doctor,' I said. Hearing this weak jest, Marie turned and gave me an indescribably evil look as she closed the door behind the departing Doctor. The crone took a seat next to me, used the candle on the nightstand to light up her clay-pipe, and set to work replacing the air in the room with curls of smoke. The words of Marie were an encrypted message that I had understood as soon as it had reached my ears. Here is its meaning: Nine months ago I got into trouble on the banks of the Meuse. As a means of getting out of this predicament I slept with Étienne d'Arcachon, the scion of a very ancient family that is infamous for passing along its defects as if they were badges and devices on its coat of arms. Anyone who has been to the royal palaces in Versailles, Vienna, or Madrid has seen the cleft lips and palates, the oddly styled jaw-bones, and the gnarled skulls of these people; King Carlos II of Spain, who is a cousin to the Arcachons in three different ways, cannot even eat solid food. Whenever a new baby is born into one of these families, the first thing everyone looks at, practically before they even let it breathe, is the architecture of the mouth and jaw. I was pleased to hear that my son would be free of these defects. But that Marie had asked proved that she had an opinion as to who the father was. But how could this be possible? 'It is obvious,' you might say, 'this Étienne d'Arcachon must have boasted, to everyone who would listen, of his conquest of the Countess de la Zeur, and nine months was more than enough time for the gossip to have reached the ears of Marie.' But you do not know Étienne. He is an odd duck, polite to a fault, and not the sort to boast. And he could not know that the baby in my womb was his. He knew only that he'd had a single opportunity to roger me (as Jack would put it). But I traveled for weeks before and weeks after in the company of other men; and certainly I had not impressed Étienne with my chastity! The only possible explanation was that Marie – or, much more likely, someone who was controlling her:had read a decyphered version of my personal journal, in which I stated explicitly that I had slept with Étienneand only Étienne. Clearly Marie and the midwife were working as cat's-paws of some Frenchman or other of high rank. M. le comte d'Avaux had been recalled to Versailles shortly after the Revolution in England, and this Chevalier de Montluçon had been sent out to assume his role. But Montluçon was a nobody, and there was no doubt in my mind that he was a meat marionette whose strings were being pulled by d'Avaux, or some other personage of great power at Versailles. Suddenly I felt sympathy with James II's queen, for here I was flat on my back in a foreign palace with a lot of strangers gazing fixedly at my vagina. Who had arranged this? What orders had been given to Marie? Marie had made it obvious that one of her tasks was to find out whether the baby was sound. Who would care whether Étienne's bastard child had a well-formed skull? Étienne had written me a love poem, if you can call it that: Some ladies boast of ancient pedigrees And prate about their ancestors a lot But cankers flourish on old family trees Whose mossy trunks do oft conceal rot. My lady's blood runs pure as mountain streams So I don't care if her high rank was bought Her beauty lends fresh vigor to my dreams Of children free of blemish and of blot. Étienne d'Arcachon wanted healthy children. He knew that his line had been ruined. He needed a wife of pure blood. I had been made a Countess; but everyone knew that my pedigree was fake and that I was really a commoner. Étienne did not care about about that – he had nobility enough in his family to make him a Duke thrice over. And he did not really care about me, either. He cared about one thing only: my ability to breed true, to make children who were not deformed. He, or someone acting on his behalf, was controlling Marie. And Marie was now effectively controlling me. That explained Marie's unseemly curiosity about what Dr. Alkmaar had felt when he had put his fingers into the baby's mouth. But what other tasks might Marie have been given? The baby trying to escape from my womb, healthy as he might be, could never be anything other than Étienne's bastard: a trivial embarrassment to him (for many men had bastards) but a gross one tome. I had bred true, and proved my ability to make healthy Arcachon babies. When Étienne heard this news, he would want to marry me, so that I could make other babies who werenot bastards. But what did it all portend for today's baby, the inconvenient and embarrassing bastard? Would he be sent to an orphanage? Raised by a cadet branch of the Arcachon family? Or – and forgive me for raising this terrible image, but this is the way my mind was working – had Marie been ordered to make certain that the child was stillborn? I looked around the room between contractions and thought of the possibilities. I had to get away from these people and deliver my baby among friends. A day of labor had left me too weak to get up, so I could hardly get up and run away from them. But perhaps I could rely upon the strength of some, and the weakness of others. I have already mentioned that Brigitte was built like a stallion. And I could tell she was good. Sometimes I am not the best judge of character, it is true, but when you are in labor, confined with certain people for what seems like a week, you come to know them very well. “Brigitte,' I said, 'it would do my heart good if you would get up and find Princess Eleanor.' Brigitte squeezed my sweaty hand and smiled, but Marie spoke first: 'Dr. Alkmaar has strictly forbidden visitors!' “Is Eleanor far away?' I asked. “Just at the other end of the gallery,' Brigitte said. “Then go there quickly and tell her I shall have a healthy baby boy very soon.' “That is by no means assured yet,' Marie pointed out, as Brigitte stormed out of the room. Marie and the midwife immediately went into the corner, turned their backs to me, and began to whisper. I had not anticipated this, but it suited my purposes. I reached over to the nightstand and wrenched the candle out of its holder. The nightstand had a lace table-cloth draped over it. When I held the flame of the candle beneath its fringe, it caught fire like gunpowder. By the time Marie and the midwife had turned around to see what was happening, the flames had already spread to the fringe of the canopy over my bed. This is what I meant when I said I must rely on the weakness of some, for as soon as Marie and the midwife perceived this, it was a sort of wrestling-match between the two of them to see which would be out the door first. They did not even bother to cry 'Fire!' on their way out of the building. This was done by a steward who had been walking up the gallery with a basin of hot water. When he saw the smoke boiling out of the open door, he cried out, alerting the whole palace, and ran into the room. Fortunately he had the presence of mind to keep the basin of water steady, and he flung its whole contents at the biggest patch of flames that caught his eye, which was on the canopy. This scalded me but did not really affect the most dangerous part of the fire, which had spread to the curtains. Mind you, I was lying on my back staring up through the tattered and flaming canopy, watching a sort of thunder-storm of smoke-clouds clashing and gathering against the ceiling. Quickly it progressed downwards, leaving a diminishing space of clear air between it and the floor. All I could do was wait for it to reach my mouth. Then suddenly Brigitte was filling the doorway. She dropped into a squat so that she could peer under the smoke and lock her eyes on mine. Did I call her stupid before? Then I withdraw the accusation, for after a few heartbeats she got a fierce look on her face, stomped forward, and gripped the end-seam of my mattress – a flat sack of feathers – with both hands. Then she kicked off her shoes, planted her bare feet against the floor, and flung herself backwards towards the door. The mattress was practically ripped out from under me – but I came with it, and shortly felt the foot of the bed sliding under my spine. My buttocks fell to the floor and my head rapped against the bed-frame, both cushioned only a little by the mattress. I felt something giving way inside my womb. But it hardly mattered now. It felt as if my whole body were coming apart like a ship dashed on rocks – each contraction another sea heaving me apart. I have a distinct memory of the stone floor sliding along inches from my eyes, boots of the staff running the other way with buckets and blankets, and – gazing forward, between my upraised knees – the huge bare feet and meaty calves of Brigitte flashing out from under her bloody skirt hem, left-right-left-right, as implacably she dragged me on the mattress down the length of the gallery to where the air was clear enough for me to see the frescoes on the ceiling. We came to a stop underneath a fresco of Minerva, who peered down at me from under the visor of her helmet, looking stern but (as I hoped) approving. Then the door gave way under Brigitte's pounding and she dragged me straight into Eleanor's bedchamber. Eleanor and Frau Heppner were sitting there drinking coffee. Princess Caroline was reading a book aloud. As you might imagine, they were all taken aback; but Frau Heppner, the midwife, took one look at me, muttered something in German, and got to her feet. Eleanor's face appeared above me. 'Frau Heppner says, ‘At last, the day becomes interesting!'' People who are especially bad, and know that they are, such as Father Édouard de Gex, may be drawn to religion because they harbor a desperate hope that it has some power to make them virtuous – to name their demons and to cast them out. But if they are as clever as he is, they can find ways to pervert their own faith and make it serve whatever bad intentions they had to begin with. Doctor, I have come to the conclusion that the true benefit of religion is not to make people virtuous, which is impossible, but to put a sort of bridle on the worst excesses of their viciousness. I do not know Eleanor well. Not well enough to know what vices may be lurking in her soul. She does not disdain religion (as did Jack, who might have benefited from it). Neither does she cling to it morbidly, like Father Édouard de Gex. This gives me hope that in her case religion will do what it is supposed to do, namely, stay her hand when she falls under the sway of some evil impulse. I have no choice but to believe that, for I let her take my baby. The child passed straightaway from the midwife's hands to Eleanor's arms, and she gathered it to her bosom as if she knew what she was doing. I did not try to fight this. I was so exhausted I could scarcely move, and afterwards I slept as if I did not care whether I ever woke up or not. In the plaintext version of my story of labor and delivery, Doctor, I tell the version that everyone at the Binnenhof believes, which is that because of the disgraceful cowardice of Marie and of that midwife, my baby died, and that I would have died, too, if brave Brigitte had not taken me to the room where the good German nurse, Frau Heppner, saw to it that the afterbirth was removed from my womb so that the bleeding stopped, and thereby saved my life. That is all nonsense. But one paragraph of it is true, and that is where I speak of the physical joy that comes over one's body when the burden it has borne for nine months is finally let go – only to be replaced a few moments later by a new burden, this one of a spiritual nature. In the plaintext story it is a burden of grief over the death of my child. But in the real story – which is always more complicated – it is a burden of uncertainty, and sadness over tragedies that may never happen. I have gone back to live by myself at the house of Huygens, and the baby remains at the Binnenhof in the care of Frau Heppner and Eleanor. We have already begun to circulate the story that he is an orphan, born to a woman on a canal-boat on the Rhine as she escaped from a massacre in the Palatinate. It seems likely that I shall live. Then I will take up this baby and try to make my way to London, and build a life for both of us there. If I should sicken and die, Eleanor will take him. But sooner or later, whether tomorrow or twenty years from now, he and I shall be separated in some way, and he shall be out in the world somewhere, living a life known to me only imperfectly. God willing, he will outlive me. In a few weeks or months, there shall be a parting of ways here at the Hague. The baby and I will go west. Eleanor and Caroline will journey east and enjoy the hospitality, and take part in the schemes of, the women whom you serve. When, God willing, I reach London I shall write you a letter. If you receive no such letter, it means that while I was recuperating I fell victim to some larger scheme of d'Avaux. He may or may not want the baby dead. He certainly wants me at Versailles, where I shall be none the less in his power for being the unwilling wife of Étienne d'Arcachon. The next few weeks, when I am too weak to move, are the most dangerous time. There remain only two loose ends to clear up: one, if Étienne is the father, why is the baby flawless? And two, if my cypher has been broken, and my private writings are being read by thecabinet noir , why am I telling you all of these secrets? Actually there is a third loose end, of a sort, which may have been troubling you: why would I sleep with Étienne in the first place, when I had my pick of ten million horny Frenchmen? All three of these loose ends may be neatly tied up by a single piece of information. During my time at Versailles I got to know Bonaventure Rossignol, the King's cryptanalyst. Rossignol, or Bon-bon as I like to call him (hello, Bon-bon!) was sent out to the Rhine front last autumn during the build-up to the invasion of the Palatinate. When I blundered in to the middle of it all, and got into trouble, Bon-bon became aware of it within a few hours, for he was reading everyone's despatches, and came galloping – literally – to my rescue. It is difficult to tell the story right under present circumstances, and so I'll jump to the end of it, and admit that his gallantry made my blood hot in a way I had never known before. It seems very crude and simple when I set it down thus, but at root it is a crude and simple thing, no? I attacked him. We made love several times. It was very sweet. But we had to devise a way out for me. Choices were few. The best plan we could come up with was that I seduced Étienne d'Arcachon, or rather stood by numbly in a sort of out-of-body trance while he seduced me. This I then parlayed into an escape north. I wrote it all down in a journal. When I got to the Hague, d'Avaux became aware of the existence of that journal and prevailed upon the King's cryptanalyst to translate it – which he did, though he left out all the best parts, namely, those passages in which he himself played the romantic hero. He could not make me out to be innocent, for d'Avaux already knew too much, and too many Frenchmen had witnessed my deeds. Instead Bon-bon contrived to tell the story in such as way as to make me into the paramour of Étienne: the true-breeding woman of his, and his family's, dreams. I must stop writing now. My body wants to suckle him, and when at night I hear him cry out from across the square, my breasts let down a thin trickle of milk, which I then wash away with a heavier flood of tears. If I were a man, I'd say I was unmanned. As I am a woman, I'll say I am over-womanned. Good-bye. If when you go back to Hanover you meet a little girl named Caroline, teach her as well as you have taught Sophie and Sophie Charlotte, for I prophesy that she will put both of them in the shade. And if Caroline is accompanied by a little orphan boy, said to have been born on the Rhine, then you shall know his story, and who is his father, and what became of his mother. Eliza Bishopsgate OCTOBER 1689 Thou art too narrow, wretch, to comprehend Even thy selfe: yea though thou wouldst but bend To know thy body. Have not all soules thought For many ages, that our body'is wrought Of Ayre, and Fire, and other Elements? And now they thinke of new ingredients, And one Soule thinkes one, and another way Another thinkes, and 'Tis an even lay. Knowst thou but how the stone doth enter in The bladders cave, and never break the skinne? – John Donne, Of the Progresse of the Soule, The Second Anniversarie THE VISITOR – FIFTY-SIX YEARS old, but a good deal more vigorous than the host – feigned aloofness as he watched his bookish minions fan out among the stacks, boxes, shelves, and barrels that now constituted the personal library of Daniel Waterhouse. One of them strayed towards an open keg. His master warned him away with a barrage of clucking, harrumphing, and finger-snaps. 'We must assume that anything Mr. Waterhouse has placed in a barrel, is bound for Boston!' But when the assistants had all found ways to make themselves busy cataloguing and appraising, he turned towards Daniel and foamed up like a bottle of champagne. 'Can't say what an immense pleasure it is to see you, old chap!' 'Really, I do not think my countenance is all that pleasing at the moment, Mr. Pepys, but it is extraordinarily decent of you to fake it so vigorously.' Samuel Pepys straightened up, blinked once, and parted his lips as if to follow up on the Conversational Opportunity Daniel had just handed him. The hand trembled and crept toward the Pocket where the Stone had lurked these thirty years. But some gentlemanly instinct averted him; he'd not crash the conversation onto that particular Hazard just yet. 'I'd have thought you would be in Massachusetts by now, from the things the Fellows were saying.' 'I should have begun making my preparations immediately following the Revolution,' Daniel admitted, 'but I delayed until after Jeffreys had his enounter with Mr. Jack Ketch at the Tower – by then, 'twas April, and I discovered that in order to leave London I should have to liquidate my life – which has proved much more of a bother than I had expected. Really, 'Tis much more expedient simply to drop dead and let one's mourners see to all of these tedious dispositions.' Daniel waved a hand over his book-stacks, which were dwindling rapidly as Pepys's corps of librarian-mercenaries carried them towards their master and piled them at his feet. Pepys glanced at the cover of each and then flicked his eyes this way or that to indicate whether they should be returned, or taken away; the latter went to a hard-bitten old computer who had set himself up with a lap-desk, quill, and inkwell, and was scratching out a bill of particulars. Daniel's remark on the convenience of dropping dead laid a second grievous temptation in the way of Mr. Pepys, who had to clench his fist to keep it from stabbing into the pocket. Fortunately he was distracted by an assistant who held before him a large book of engravings of diverse fishes. Pepys frowned at it for a moment. Then he recognized and rejected in the same instant, with revulsion. The R.S. had printed too many copies of it several years ago. Ever since, Fellows had been fobbing copies off on each other, trying to use them as legal tender for payment of old debts, employing them as doorstops, table-levelers, flower-presses, et cetera . Daniel was not normally a cruel man, but he had been laid flat by nausea for days, and could not resist tormenting Pepys yet a third time: 'Thy judgment is swift and remorseless, Mr. Pepys. Each book goes to thy left hand or thy right. When a ship founders in a hurricano, and Saint Peter is suddenly confronted with a long queue of soggy souls, not even he could despatch 'em to their deserved places as briskly as thee.' 'You are toying with me, Mr. Waterhouse; you have penetrated my deception, you know why I have come.' 'Not at all. How goes it with you since the Revolution? I have heard nothing of you.' 'I am retired, Mr. Waterhouse. Retired to the life of a gentleman scholar. My aims now are to assemble a library to rival Sir Elias Ashmole's, and to try to fill the void that shall be left by your departure from the day-to-day affairs of the Royal Society.' 'You must have been tempted to plunge into the new Court, the new Parliament – ' 'Not in the slightest.' 'Really?' 'To move in those circles is a bit like swimming. Swimming with rocks in one's pockets! It demands ceaseless exertions. To let up is to die. I bequeath that sort of life to younger and more energetic strivers, like your friend the Marquis of Ravenscar. At my age, I am happy to stand on dry land.' 'What about those rocks in your pockets?' 'I beg your pardon?' 'I am giving you a cue, Mr. Pepys – the segue you have been looking for.' 'Ah, well done!' said Pepys, and in a lunge he was by Daniel's bedside, holding the auld Stone right up in his face. Daniel had never seen it quite this close before, and he noticed now that it had a pair of symmetrically placed protrusions, like little horns, where it had begun growing up into the ureters leading down from Pepys's kidneys. This made him queasy and so he shifted his attention to Pepys's face, which was nearly as close. 'BEHOLD! My Death – premature, senseless, avoidable Death – mine, and yours, Daniel. But I hold mine in my hand. Yours is lodged thereabouts – do not flinch, I shall not lay hands on you – I wish only to demonstrate, Daniel, that thy Stone is only two inches or so from my hand when I hold it thus. My Stone is in my hand. A distance of only two inches! Yet for me that small interval amounts to thirty years of added life – three decades and God willing one or two more, of wenching, drinking, singing, and learning. I beg you to make the necessary arrangements, Daniel, and have that rock in your bladder moved two inches to your pocket, where it may lodge for another twenty or thirty years without giving you any trouble.' 'They are a very significant two inches, Mr. Pepys.' 'Obviously.' 'During the Plague Year, when we lodged at Epsom, I held candles for Mr. Hooke while he dissected the bodies of diverse creatures – humans included. By then I had enough skill that I could dissect most parts of most creatures. But I was always baffled by necks, and by those few inches around the bladder. Those parts had to be left to the superior skill of Mr. Hooke. All those orifices, sphincters, glands, frightfully important bits of plumbing – ' At the mention of Hooke's name, Pepys brightened as if he had been put in mind of something to say; but as Daniel's anatomy lesson drew on, his expression faded and soured. 'I of course know this, ' Pepys finally said, cutting him off. 'Of course.' 'I know it of my own knowledge, and I have had occasion to review and refresh my mastery of the subject whenever some dear friend of mine has died of the Stone – John Wilkins comes to mind – ' 'That is low, a very low blow, for you to mention him now!' 'He is gazing down on you from Heaven saying, ‘Can't wait to see you up here Daniel, but I don't mind waiting another quarter-century or so, by all means take your time, have that Stone out, and finish your work.'' 'I really think you cannot possibly be any more disgraceful now, Mr. Pepys, and I beg you to leave a sick man alone.' 'All right . . . let's to the pub then!' 'I am unwell, thank you.' 'When's the last time you ate solid food?' 'Can't remember.' 'Liquid food, then?' 'I've no incentive to take on liquids, lacking as I do the means of getting rid of 'em.' 'Come to the pub anyway, we are having a going-away party for you.' 'Call it off, Mr. Pepys. The equinoctial gales have begun. To sail for America now were foolish. I have entered into an arrangement with a Mr. Edmund Palling, an old man of my long acquaintance, who has for many years longed to migrate to Massachusetts with his family. It has been settled that in April of next year we shall board the Torbay, a newly built ship, at Southend-on-Sea; and after a voyage of approximately – ' 'You'll be dead a week from now.' 'I know it.' 'Perfect time for a going-away party then.' Pepys clapped his hands twice. Somehow this caused loud thumping noises to erupt in the hall outside. 'I cannot walk to your carriage, sir.' 'No need,' Pepys said, opening the door to reveal two porters carrying a sedan-chair – one of the smallest type, little more than a sarcophagus on sticks, made so that its occupant could be brought from the street all the way into a house before having to climb out, and therefore popular among shy persons, such as prostitutes. 'Ugh, what will people think?' 'That the Fellows of the Royal Society are entertaining someone extremely mysterious – business as usual!' Pepys answered. 'Do not think of our reputations, Daniel, they cannot sink any lower; and we shall have plenty of time, after you are gone, to sort that out.' Under a flood of mostly non-constructive criticism from Mr. Pepys, the two porters lifted Daniel up out of his bed, turning gray-green as they worked. Daniel remembered the odor that had filled Wilkins's bedchamber during his final weeks, and supposed that he must smell the same way now. His body was as light and stiff as a fish that has been dried on a rack in the sun. They put him into that black box and latched the door on him, and Daniel's nostrils filled with the scent of perfumes and powders left behind by the usual clientele. Or maybe that was what ordinary London air smelt like compared to his bed. His Reference Frame began to tilt and sway as they maneuvered him down-stairs. They took him north beyond the Roman wall, which was the wrong way. But inasmuch as Daniel was facing his own death, it seemed illogical to fret over something as inconsequential as being kidnapped by a couple of sedan-chair carriers. When he wrenched his rigid neck around to peer out through the screened aperture in the back of the box, he saw Pepys's coach stealing along behind. As they maneuvered through streets and alleys, diverse views, prospects, and more or less pathetic spectacles presented themselves. But one large, newly-completed, stone building with a cupola kept presenting itself square in their path, closer and closer. It was Bedlam. Now at this point any other man in London would have commenced screaming and trying to kick his way out, as he'd have realized that he was about to be sent into that place for a stay of unknown duration. But Daniel was nearly unique among Londoners in that he thought of Bedlam not solely as a dumping-ground for lunatics but also as the haunt of his friend and colleague Mr. Robert Hooke. Calmly he allowed himself to be carried in through its front door. That said, he was a bit relieved when the porters turned away from the locked rooms and conveyed him towards Hooke's office under the cupola. The howls and screams of the inmates faded to a sort of dim background babble, then were drowned out by more cheerful voices coming through a polished door. Pepys scurried round in front of the sedan chair and flung that door open to reveal everyone: not only Hooke, but Christiaan Huygens, Isaac Newton, Isaac's little shadow Fatio, Robert Boyle, John Locke, Roger Comstock, Christopher Wren, and twenty others – mostly Royal Society regulars, but a few odd men out such as Edmund Palling and Sterling Waterhouse. They took him out of his sedan chair like a rare specimen being unpacked from its shipping-crate and held him up to accept several waves of cheers and toasts. Roger Comstock (who, since England's Adult Supervision had all run away to France, was becoming more terribly important every day) stood up on Hooke's lens-grinding table (Hooke became irate, and had to be restrained by Wren) and commanded silence. Then he held up a beaker of some fluid that was more transparent than water. 'We all know of Mr. Daniel Waterhouse's high regard and admiration for Alchemy,' Roger began. This was made twice as funny by the exaggerated pomposity of his voice and manner; he was using his speaking-to-Parliament voice. After the laughter and Parliamentary barking noises had died down, he continued, just as gravely: 'Alchemy has created many a miracle in our time, and I am assured, by some of its foremost practitioners, that within a few years they will have accomplished what has, for millennia, been the paramount goal of every Alchemist: namely, to bring us immorality !' Roger Comstock now affected a look of extreme astonishment as the room erupted into true Bedlam. Daniel could not help glancing over at Isaac, who was the last man in the world to find anything amusing in a joke about Alchemy or immorality. But Isaac smiled and exchanged a look with Fatio. Roger cupped a hand to his ear and listened carefully, then appeared taken aback. 'What!? You say, instead, immortality ?' Now he waxed indignant, and pointed a finger at Boyle. 'Sirrah, my solicitor will call upon you in the morning to see about getting my money back!' The audience had now been rendered completely helpless, which was the way Roger liked his audiences. They could only wait for him to continue, which he was only too happy to do: 'The Chymists have accomplished smaller miracles along their way. Among those who frequent drinking establishments – or so I am told – it is known, empirically, that spiritous liquors are frequently contaminated by unwanted and unwholesome by-products. Of these, the most offensive by far is water, which gorges the bladder and obliges the drinker to step outside, where he is subject to cold, rain, wind, and the disapproving glares of neighbors and passers-by until such time as the bladder has become empty – which in the case of our Guest of Honor may be as long as a fortnight!' 'I can only say in my defense that I have time to sober up during those fortnights,' Daniel returned, 'and when I go back inside I find that you have left all the glasses empty, my lord.' Roger Comstock answered, 'It is true. I give the contents of those glasses to our Alchemical brethren, who use them in their lucubrations. They have learnt how to remove water from wine and produce the pure spirit. But this is beginning to sound like a theologickal discourse, and so let me turn to practical matters.' Roger hoisted the beaker up above his head. 'Pray, gentlemen, extinguish all smoking materials! We do not wish to set fire to Mr. Hooke's edifice. The inmates will be so terrified that they will be driven sane, to a man. I hold in my hand the pure spirit I spoke of, and it could burn the place down like Greek fire. It will remain a grave hazard until our Guest of Honor has been so prudent as to sequester it in his belly. Cheers to you, Daniel; and rest assured that this libation will surely go to your head, but not a drop of it will trouble your kidneys!' Under the center of the cupola they had set up a very stout oaken chair on a platform like a throne, which Daniel thought extremely considerate, as it put his head at or above the level of everyone else's. It was the first time in ages he'd been able to talk to anyone without feeling as if he were being peered down at. Once he was mounted in that chair, and wedged more or less upright by a few pillows, he did not have to move anything save his jaw and his drinking-arm. The others came round in ones and twos to pay court to him. Wren spoke of the progress building the great Dome of St. Paul's. Edmund Palling related details of the voyage to Massachusetts planned for April. Hooke, when not arguing with Huygens about clocks (and fending off bawdy puns on 'horology' from Roger Comstock), discoursed of his work on artificial muscles. He did not say that they were for use in flying machines, but Daniel already knew it. Isaac Newton was living in London now, sharing lodgings with Fatio, and had become Member of Parliament for Cambridge. Roger was bursting with scandalous gossip. Sterling was devising some sort of plot with Sir Richard Apthorp, some colossal scheme for financing the eternal follies of Government. Spain might have mines in America and France might have an infinite supply of taxable peasants, but Sterling and Sir Richard seemed to think that England could overcome her lack of both with some metaphysical sleight-of-hand. Huygens came over and told him the melancholy news that the Countess de la Zeur had got pregnant out of wedlock, then lost her baby. In a way, though, Daniel was pleased to hear that she was getting on with her life. He had dreamed once of proposing marriage to her. Looking at his condition now, it was hard to imagine a worse idea. But thinking about her put him into a sort of reverie from which he did not return. He did not lose consciousness at any one certain point; consciousness slowly leaked out of him, rather, over the course of the evening. Every friend who came to greet him raised his glass, and Daniel raised his beaker in return. The liquor did not trickle down his throat but raced like panic across his mucous membranes, burning his eye-sockets and his eustachian tubes, and seeping direct from there into his brain. His vision faded. The babble and roar of the party put him gently to sleep. The quiet woke him up. The quiet, and the light. He phant'sied for a moment that they had carried him out to face the Sun. But there were several suns ranged about him in a constellation. He tried to raise first one arm, then the other, to shield his eyes from the glare, but neither limb would move. His legs, too, were frozen in place. 'Perhaps you imagine you are having a cerebral anomaly, a near-death, or even a post-death, experience,' said a voice quietly. It emanated from down low, between Daniel's knees. 'And that several arch-angels are arrayed before you, burning your eyes with their radiance. In that case I would be a shade, a poor gray ghost, and the screams and moans you hear from far off would be the complaints of other departed souls being taken off to Hell.' Hooke was indeed too dim to see clearly, for the lights were behind him. He was sorting through some instruments and tools on a table that had been set in front of the chair. Now that Daniel had stopped looking into the bright lights, his eyes had adjusted well enough to see what was restraining him: white linen cord, miles of it, spiraled around his arms and legs, and cunningly interwoven into a sort of custom-built web or net. This was clearly the work of the meticulous Hooke, for even Daniel's fingers and thumbs had been individually laced down, knuckle by knuckle, to the arms of this chair, which were as massive as the timbers of a gun-carriage. His mind went back to Epsom during the Plague Year, when Hooke would sit in the sun for an hour watching through a lens as a spider bound up a horse-fly with whorls of gossamer. The other detail that caught his eye was the gleaming of the small devices that Hooke was sorting out on the table. In addition to the various magnifiers that Hooke always had with him, there was the crooked probe that would be inserted up the length of the patient's urethra to find and hold the stone. Next to it was the lancet for making the incision through the scrotum and up into the bladder. Then a hook for reaching up through that opening and pulling the stone down and out between the testicles, and an assortment of variously sized and shaped rakes for scraping the inside of the bladder and probing up into the ureters to find and withdraw any smaller stones that might be a-building in the crannies. There was the silver pipe that would be left in his urethra so that the uproar of urine, blood, lymph, and pus would not be dammed up by the inevitable swelling, and there was the fine sheep-gut for sewing him back together, and the curved needles and pliers for drawing it through his flesh. But for some reason none of these sights perturbed him so much as the scale standing by at the end of the table, its polished brass pans flashing inscrutable signals to him as they oscillated on the ends of their gleaming chains. Hooke, ever the empiricist, would of course weigh the stone when it came out. 'In truth you are still alive and will be for many years – more years than I have remaining. There are some who die of shock, it is true, and perhaps that is why all of your friends wished to come and pass time time with you before I started. But, as I recollect, you were shot with a blunderbuss once, and got up and walked away from it. So I am not afraid on that ‘count. The bright lights you see are sticks of burning phosphorus. And I am Robert Hooke, than whom no man was ever better suited to perform this work.' 'No, Robert.' Hooke took advantage of Daniel's plea to jam a leather strap into his mouth. 'You may bite down on that if you wish, or you may spit it out and scream all you like – this is Bedlam, and no one will object. Neither will anyone take heed, or show mercy. Least of all Robert Hooke. For as you know, Daniel, I am utterly lacking in the quality of mercy. Which is well, as it would render me perfectly incompetent to carry out this operation. I told you a year ago, in the Tower, that I would one day repay your friendship by giving you something – a pearl of great price. Now the time has come for me to make good on that promise. The only question left to answer is how much will that pearl weigh, when I have washed your blood off it and let it clatter onto the pan of yonder scale. I am sorry you woke up. I shall not insult you by suggesting that you relax. Please do not go insane. I will see you on the other side of the Styx.' When he and Hooke and Wilkins had cut open live dogs during the Plague Year, Daniel had looked into their straining brown eyes and tried to fathom what was going on in their minds. He'd decided, in the end, that nothing was, that dogs had no conscious minds, no thought of past or future, living purely in the moment, and that this made it worse for them. Because they could neither look forward to the end of the pain, nor remember times when they had chased rabbits across meadows. Hooke took up his blade and reached for Daniel. Dramatis Personae MEMBERS OF THE NOBILITY went by more than one name: their family surnames and Christian names, but also their titles. For example, the younger brother of King Charles II had the family name Stuart and was baptized James, and so might be called James Stuart; but for most of his life he was the Duke of York, and so might also be referred to, in the third person anyway, as 'York' (but in the second person as 'Your Royal Highness'). Titles frequently changed during a person's lifetime, as it was common during this period for commoners to be ennobled, and nobles of lower rank to be promoted. And so not only might a person have several names at any one moment, but certain of those names might change as he acquired new titles through ennoblement, promotion, conquest, or (what might be considered a combination of all three) marriage. This multiplicity of names will be familiar to many readers who dwell on the east side of the Atlantic, or who read a lot of books like this. To others it may be confusing or even maddening. The following Dramatis Personae may be of help in resolving ambiguities. If consulted too early and often, it may let cats out of bags by letting the reader know who is about to die, and who isn't. The compiler of such a table faces a problem similar to the one that bedeviled Leibniz when trying to organize his patron's library. The entries (books in Leibniz's case, personages here) must be arranged in a linear fashion according to some predictable scheme. Below, they are alphabetized by name. But since more than one name applies to many of the characters, it is not always obvious where the entry should be situated. Here I have sacrificed consistency for ease of use by placing each entry under the name that is most commonly used in the book. So, for example, Louis-François de Lavardac, duc d'Arcachon, is under 'A' rather than 'L' because he is almost always called simply the duc d'Arcachon in the story. But Knott Bolstrood, Count Penistone, is under 'B' because he is usually called Bolstrood. Cross-references to the main entries are spotted under 'L' and 'P,' respectively. Entries that are relatively reliable, according to scholarly sources, are in Roman type. Entries in italics contain information that is more likely to produce confusion, misunderstanding, severe injury, and death if relied upon by time travelers visiting the time and place in question. ANGLESEY , LOUIS : 1648–. Earl of Upnor. Son of Thomas More Anglesey. Courtier and friend of the Duke of Monmouth during the Interregnum and, after the Restoration, at Trinity College, Cambridge. ANGLESEY , PHILLIP : 1645–. Count Sheerness. Son of Thomas More Anglesey. ANGLESEY , THOMAS MORE : 1618–1679. Duke of Gunfleet. A leading Cavalier and a member of Charles II's court in exile during the Interregnum. After the Restoration, one of the A's in Charles II's CABAL (which see). Relocated to France during the Popish Plot troubles, died there. ANNE IOF ENGLAND : 1665–1714. Daughter of James II by his first wife, Anne Hyde. APTHORP , RICHARD : 1631–. Businessman and banker. One of theA 's in Charles II's CABAL (which see). A founder of the Bank of England. d' ARCACHON, DUC : 1634–. Louis-François de Lavardac. A cousin to Louis XIV. Builder, and subsequently Admiral, of the French Navy. d' ARCACHON , ÉTIENNE : 1662–. Étienne de Lavardac. Son and heir of Louis-François de Lavardac, duc d'Arcachon. d' ARTAGNAN , CHARLES DE BATZ -CASTELMORE : c. 1620–1673. French musketeer and memoirist. ASHMOLE , SIR ELIAS : 1617–1692. Astrologer, alchemist, autodidact, Comptroller and Auditor of the Excise, collector of curiosities, and founder of Oxford's Ashmolean Museum. D' AVAUX , JEAN -ANTOINE DE MESMES, COMTE : French ambassador to the Dutch Republic, later an advisor to James II during his campaign in Ireland. BOLSTROOD , GOMER : 1645–. Son of Knott. Dissident agitator, later an immigrant to New England and a furniture maker there. BOLSTROOD , GREGORY : 1600–1652. Dissident preacher. Founder of the Puritan sect known as the Barkers. BOLSTROOD , KNOTT : 1628–1682. Son of Gregory. Ennobled as Count Penistone and made Secretary of State by Charles II. The B in Charles II's CABAL (which see). BOYLE , ROBERT : 1627–1691. Chemist, member of the Experimental Philosophical Club at Oxford, Fellow of the Royal Society. VON BOYNEBURG , JOHANN CHRISTIAN : 1622–1672. An early patron of Leibniz in Mainz. CABAL, THE : unofficial name of Charles II's post-Restoration cabinet, loosely modeled after Louis XIV's Conseil d'en-Haut, which is to say that each member had a general area of responsibility, but the boundaries were vague and overlapping (see table). CAROLINE , PRINCESS OF BRANDENBURG -ANSBACH : 1683–1737. Daughter of Eleanor, Princess of Saxe-Eisenach. CASTLEMAINE , LADY : see Villiers, Barbara. CATHERINE OF BRAGANZA : 1638–1705. Portuguese wife of Charles II of England. CHARLES IOF ENGLAND : 1600–1649. Stuart king of England, decapitated at the Banqueting House after the victory of Parliamentary forces under Oliver Cromwell. CHARLES IIOF ENGLAND : 1630–1685. Son of Charles I. Exiled to France and later the Netherlands during the Interregnum. Returned to England 1660 and re-established monarchy (the Restoration). CHARLES LOUIS , ELECTOR PALATINATE : 1617–1680. Eldest surviving son of the Winter King and Queen, brother of Sophie, father of Liselotte. Re-established his family in the Palatinate following the Thirty Years' War. CHARLES , ELECTOR PALATINATE : 1651–1685. Son and heir to Charles Louis. War-gaming enthusiast. Died young of disease contracted during a mock siege. CHESTER , LORD BISHOP OF : see Wilkins, John. CHURCHILL , JOHN : 1650–1722. Courtier, warrior, duellist, cocksman, hero, later Duke of Marlborough. CHURCHILL , WINSTON : Royalist, Squire, courtier, early Fellow of the Royal Society, father of John Churchill. CLEVELAND , DUCHESS OF : see Villiers, Barbara. COMENIUS , JOHN AMOS (JAN AMOS KOMENSKY ): 1592–1670. Moravian Pansophist, an inspiration to Wilkins and Leibniz among many others. COMSTOCK , CHARLES : 1650–1708. Son of John. Student of Natural Philosophy. After the retirement of John and the death of his elder brother, Richard, an immigrant to Connecticut. COMSTOCK , JOHN : 1607–1685. Leading Cavalier, and member of Charles II's court in exile in France. Scion of the so-called Silver branch of the Comstock family. Armaments maker. Early patron of the Royal Society. After the Restoration, the C in Charles II's CABAL (which see). Father of Richard and Charles Comstock. COMSTOCK , RICHARD : 1638–1673. Eldest son and heir of John Comstock. Died at naval battle of Sole Bay. COMSTOCK , ROGER : 1646–. Scion of the so-called Golden branch of the Comstock family. Classmate of Newton, Daniel Waterhouse, the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Upnor, and George Jeffreys at Trinity College, Cambridge, during the early 1660s. Later, a successful developer of real estate, and Marquis of Ravenscar. DE CRÉPY : French family of gentlemen and petty nobles until the Wars of Religion in France, during which time they began to pursue a strategy of aggressive upward mobility. They intermarried in two different ways with the older but declining de Gex family. One of them (Anne Marie de Crépy, 1653–) married the much older duc d'Oyonnax and survived him by many years. Her sister (Charlotte Adélaide de Crépy 1656–) married the Marquis d'Ozoir. CROMWELL , OLIVER : 1599–1658. Parliamentary leader, general of the anti-Royalist forces during the English Civil War, scourge of Ireland, and leading man of England during the Commonwealth, or Interregnum. CROMWELL , ROGER : 1626–1712. Son and (until the Restoration) successor of his much more formidable father, Oliver. EAUZE , CLAUDE : see d'Ozoir, Marquis . ELEANOR , PRINCESS OF SAXE -EISENACH : d. 1696. Mother (by her first husband, the Margrave of Ansbach) of Caroline, Princess of Brandenburg-Ansbach. Late in life, married to the Elector of Saxony. ELISABETH CHARLOTTE : 1652–1722. Liselotte, La Palatine. Known as Madame in the French court. Daughter of Charles Louis, Elector Palatinate, and niece of Sophie. Married Philippe, duc d'Orléans, the younger brother of Louis XIV. Spawned the House of Orléans. EPSOM , EARL OF : see Comstock, John. FREDERICK V, ELECTOR PALATINATE : 1596–1632. King of Bohemia (“Winter King') briefly in 1618, lived and died in exile during the Thirty Years' War. Father of many princes, electors, duchesses, etc., including Sophie. FREDERICK WILLIAM , ELECTOR OF BRANDENBURG : 1620– 1688. Known as the Great Elector. After the Thirty Years' War created a standing professional army, small but effective. By playing the great powers of the day (Sweden, France, and the Hapsburgs) against each other, consolidated the scattered Hohenzollern fiefdoms into a coherent state, Brandenburg-Prussia. DE GEX : A petty-noble family of Jura, which dwindled until the early seventeenth century, when the two surviving children of Henry, Sieur de Gex (1595–1660), Francis and Louise-Anne, each married a member of the more sanguine family de Crépy. The children of Francis carried on the de Gex name. Their youngest was Édouard de Gex. The children of Louise-Anne included Anne Marie de Crépy (later duchesse d'Oyonnax) and Charlotte Adélaide de Crépy (later marquise d'Ozoir). DE GEX , FATHER ÉDOUARD : 1663–. Youngest offspring of Marguerite Diane de Crépy (who died giving birth to him) and Francis de Gex, who was thirty-eight years old and in declining health. Raised at a school and orphanage in Lyons by Jesuits, who found in him an exceptionally gifted pupil. Became a Jesuit himself at the the age of twenty. Was posted to Versailles, where he became a favorite of Mademoiselle. de Maintenon. GREAT ELECTOR : see Frederick William. GUNFLEET , DUKE OF : see Anglesey, Thomas More. GWYN , NELL : 1650–1687. Fruit retailer and comedienne, one of the mistresses of Charles II. HAM , THOMAS : 1603–. Money-goldsmith, husband of Mayflower Waterhouse, leading man of Ham Bros. Goldsmiths. Created Earl of Walbrook by Charles II. HAM , WILLIAM : 1662–. Son of Thomas and Mayflower. HENRIETTA ANNE : 1644–1670. Sister of Charles II and James II of England, first wife of Philippe, duc d'Orléans, Louis XIV's brother. HENRIETTA MARIA : 1609–1669. Sister of King Louis XIII of France, wife of King Charles I of England, mother of Charles II and James II of England. HOOKE , ROBERT : 1635–1703. Artist, linguist, astronomer, geometer, microscopist, mechanic, horologist, chemist, optician, inventor, philosopher, botanist, anatomist, etc. Curator of Experiments for the Royal Society, Surveyor of London after the fire. Friend and collaborator of Christopher Wren. HUYGENS , CHRISTIAAN : 1629–1695. Great Dutch astronomer, horologist, mathematician, and physicist. HYDE , ANNE : 1637–1671. First wife of James, Duke of York (later James II). Mother of two English queens: Mary (of William and Mary) and Anne. JAMES IOF ENGLAND : 1566–1625. First Stuart king of England. JAMES IIOF ENGLAND : 1633–1701. Duke of York for much of his early life. Became King of England upon the death of his brother in 1685. Deposed in the Glorious Revolution, late 1688–early 1689. JAMES VIOF SCOTLAND : see James I of England. JEFFREYS , GEORGE : 1645–1689. Welsh gentleman, lawyer, solicitor general to the Duke of York, lord chief justice, and later lord chancellor under James II. Created Baron Jeffreys of Wem in 1685. JOHANN FRIEDRICH : 1620–1679. Duke of Braunschweig-Lüneburg, book collector, a patron of Leibniz. JOHN FREDERICK : see Johann Friedrich. KÉROUALLE , LOUISE DE : 1649–1734. Duchess of Portsmouth. One of the mistresses of Charles II. KETCH , JACK : Name given to executioners. LAVARDAC : A branch of the Bourbon family producing various hereditary dukes and peers of France, including the duc d'Arcachon(see). LE FEBURE : French alchemist/apothecary who moved to London at the time of the Restoration to provide services to the Court. LEIBNIZ , GOTTFRIED WILHELM : 1646–1716. Refer to novel. LESTRANGE , SIR ROGER : 1616–1704. Royalist pamphleteer and (after the Restoration) Surveyor of the Imprimery, hence chief censor for Charles II. Nemesis of Milton. Translator. LEWIS , HUGH : 1625–. General. Created Duke of Tweed by Charles II after the Restoration, in recognition of his crossing the River Tweed with his regiment (thenceforth called the Coldstream Guards) in support of the resurgent monarchy. The L in Charles II's CABAL (which see). LISELOTTE : seeElisabeth Charlotte. LOCKE , JOHN : 1632–1704. Natural Philosopher, physician, political advisor, philosopher. DE MAINTENON , MME. : 1635–1719. Mistress, then second and last wife of Louis XIV. MARY : 1662–1694. Daughter of James II and Anne Hyde. After the Glorious Revolution (1689), Queen of England with her husband, William of Orange. MARY OF MODENA : 1658–1718. Second and last wife of James II of England. Mother of James Stuart, aka 'the Old Pretender.' MAURICE : 1621–1652. One of the numerous princely offspring of the Winter Queen. Active as a Cavalier in the English Civil War. dE MESMES , JEAN -ANTOINE : see d'Avaux. MINETTE : see Henrietta Anne. MONMOUTH , DUKE OF (JAMES SCOTT ): 1649–1685. Bastard of Charles II by one Lucy Walter. MORAY , ROBERT : c. 1608–1673. Scottish soldier, official, and courtier, a favorite of Charles II. Early Royal Society figure, probably instrumental in securing the organization's charter. NEWTON , ISAAC : 1642–1727. Refer to novel. OLDENBURG , HENRY : 1615–1677. Emigrant from Bremen. Secretary of the Royal Society, publisher of the Philosophical Transactions, prolific correspondent. D 'OYONNAX , ANNE MARIE DE CRÉPY, DUCHESSE : 1653–. Lady in Waiting to the Dauphine, Satanist, poisoner. D 'OZOIR , CHARLOTTE ADÉLAIDE DE CRÉPY, MARQUISE : 1656–. Wife of Claude Eauze, Marquis d'Ozoir. D 'OZOIR , CLAUDE EAUZE , MARQUIS : 1650–. Illegitimate son of Louis-François de Lavardac, duc d'Arcachon, by a domestic servant, Luce Eauze. Traveled to India in late 1660s as part of ill-fated French East India Company expedition. In 1674, when noble titles went on sale to raise funds for the Dutch war, he purchased the title Marquis d'Ozoir using a loan from his father secured by revenues from his slaving operations in Africa. PENISTONE , COUNT : see Bolstrood, Knott. PEPYS , SAMUEL : 1633–1703. Clerk, Administrator to the Royal Navy, Member of Parliament, Fellow of the Royal Society, diarist, man about town. PETERS , HUGH : 1598–1660. Fulminant Puritan preacher. Spent time in Holland and Massachusetts, returned to England, became Cromwell's chaplain. Poorly thought of by Irish for his involvement with massacres at Drogheda and Wexford. For his role in the regicide of Charles I, executed by Jack Ketch, using a knife, in 1660. PHILIPPE, DUC D' ORLÉANS : 1640–1701. Younger brother of King Louis XIV of France. Known as Monsieur to the French Court. Husband first of Henrietta Anne of England, later of Liselotte. Progenitor of the House of Orléans. PORTSMOUTH , DUCHESS OF : see Kéroualle, Louise de. QWGHLM : Title bestowed on Eliza by William of Orange. RAVENSCAR , MARQUIS OF : see Comstock, Roger. ROSSIGNOL , ANTOINE : 1600–1682. “ France's first full-time cryptologist' (David Kahn, The Codebreakers, which buy and read). A favorite of Richelieu, Louis XIII, Mazarin, and Louis XIV. ROSSIGNOL , BONAVENTURE : d. 1705. Cryptanalyst to Louis XIV following the death of his father, teacher, and collaborator Antoine. RUPERT : 1619–1682. One of the numerous princely offspring of the Winter Queen. Active as a Cavalier in the English Civil War. DE RUYTER , MICHIEL ADRIAANSZOON : 1607–1676. Exceptionally gifted Dutch admiral. Particularly effective against the English. VON SCHÖNBORN , JOHANN PHILIPP : 1605–1673. Elector and Archbishop of Mainz, statesman, diplomat, and early patron of Leibniz. SHEERNESS , COUNT : see Anglesey, Phillip. SOPHIE : 1630–1714. Youngest daughter of the Winter Queen. Married Ernst August, who later became duke of Braunschweig-Lüneburg. Later the name of this principality was changed to Hanover, and Ernst August and Sophie elevated to the status of Elector and Electress. From 1707 onwards, she was first in line to the English throne. SOPHIE CHARLOTTE : 1668–1705. Eldest daughter of Sophie. Married Frederick III, elector of Brandenburg and son of the Great Elector. In 1701, when Brandenburg-Prussia was elevated to the status of a kingdom by the Holy Roman Emperor, she became the first Queen of Prussia and spawned the House of Prussia. STUART , ELIZABETH : 1596–1662. Daughter of King James I of England, sister of Charles I. Married Frederick, Elector Palatinate. Proclaimed Queen of Bohemia briefly in 1618, hence her sobriquet 'the Winter Queen.' Lived in exile during the Thirty Years' War, mostly in the Dutch Republic. Outlived her husband by three decades. Mother of many children, including Sophie. STUART , JAMES : 1688–1766. Controversial but probably legitimate son of James II by his second wife, Mary of Modena. Raised in exile in France. Following the death of his father, styled James III by the Jacobite faction in England and 'the OId Pretender' by supporters of the Hanoverian succession. UPNOR , EARL OF : see Anglesey, Louis. VILLIERS , BARBARA (LADY CASTLEMAINE , DUCHESS OF CLEVELAND) : 1641–1709. Indefatigable mistress of many satisfied Englishmen of high rank, including Charles II and John Churchill. WALBROOK , EARL OF : see Ham, Thomas. WATERHOUSE , ANNE : 1649–. Née Anne Robertson. English colonist in Massachusetts. Wife of Praise-God Waterhouse. WATERHOUSE , BEATRICE : 1642–. Née Beatrice Durand. Huguenot wife of Sterling. WATERHOUSE , CALVIN : 1563–1605. Son of John, father of Drake. WATERHOUSE , DANIEL : 1646–. Youngest (by far) child of Drake by his second wife, Hortense. WATERHOUSE , DRAKE : 1590–1666. Son of Calvin, father of Raleigh, Sterling, Mayflower, Oliver, and Daniel. Independent trader, political agitator, leader of Pilgrims and Dissidents. WATERHOUSE , ELIZABETH : 1621–. Née Elizabeth Flint. Wife of Raleigh Waterhouse. WATERHOUSE , EMMA : 1656–. Daughter of Raleigh and Elizabeth. WATERHOUSE , FAITH : 1689–. Née Faith Page. English colonist in Massachusetts. (Much younger) wife of Daniel, mother of Godfrey. WATERHOUSE , GODFREY WILLIAM : 1708–. Son of Daniel and Faith in Boston. WATERHOUSE , HORTENSE : 1625–1658. Née Hortense Bowden. Second wife (m. 1645) of Drake Waterhouse, and mother of Daniel. WATERHOUSE , JANE : 1599–1643. Née Jane Wheelwright. A pilgrim in Leiden. First wife (m. 1617) of Drake, mother of Raleigh, Sterling, Oliver, and Mayflower. WATERHOUSE , JOHN : 1542–1597. Devout early English Protestant. Decamped to Geneva during reign of Bloody Mary. Father of Calvin Waterhouse. WATERHOUSE , MAYFLOWER : 1621–. Daughter of Drake and Jane, wife of Thomas Ham, mother of William Ham. WATERHOUSE , OLIVER I: 1625–1646. Son of Drake and Jane. Died in Battle of Newark during English Civil War. WATERHOUSE , OLIVER II: 1653–. Son of Raleigh and Elizabeth. WATERHOUSE , PRAISE -GOD : 1649–. Eldest son of Raleigh and Elizabeth. Immigrated to Massachusetts Bay Colony. Father of Wait Still Waterhouse. WATERHOUSE , RALEIGH : 1618–. Eldest son of Drake, father of Praise-God, Oliver II, and Emma. WATERHOUSE , STERLING : 1630–. Son of Drake. Real estate developer. Later ennobled as Earl of Willesden. WATERHOUSE , WAIT STILL : 1675–. Son of Praise-God in Boston. Graduate of Harvard College. Congregational preacher. WEEM , WALTER : 1652–. Husband of Emma Waterhouse. WHEELWRIGHT , JANE : see Waterhouse, Jane. WILHELMINA CAROLINE : see Caroline, Princess of Brandenburg-Ansbach. WILKINS , JOHN (BISHOP OF CHESTER ): 1614–1672. Cryptographer. Science fiction author. Founder, first chairman, and first secretary of the Royal Society. Private chaplain to Charles Louis, Elector Palatinate. Warden of Wadham (Oxford) and Master of Trinity (Cambridge). Prebendary of York, Dean of Ripon, holder of many other ecclesiastical appointments. Friend of Nonconformists, Supporter of Freedom of Conscience. WILLESDEN , EARL OF : see Waterhouse, Sterling. WILLIAM IIOF ORANGE : 1626–1650. Father of the better-known William III of Orange. Died young (of smallpox). WILLIAM IIIOF ORANGE : 1650–1702. With Mary, daugher of James II, co-sovereign of England from 1689. WINTER KING : see Frederick V . WINTER QUEEN : see Stuart, Elizabeth . WREN , CHRISTOPHER : 1632–1723. Prodigy, Natural Philosopher, and Architect, a member of the Experimental Philosophical Club and later Fellow of the Royal Society. YORK , DUKE OF : The traditional title of whomever is next in line to the English throne. During much of this book, James, brother to Charles II. DE LA ZEUR : Eliza was created Countess de la Zeur by Louis XIV. Acknowledgments A work like this one hangs in an immense web of dependencies that cannot be done justice by a brief acknowledgments page. Such a project would be inconceivable were it not for the efforts of scholars and scientists dating back to the era of Wilkins and Comenius, and extending into the present day. Not to say as much would be unjust. But in a work of fiction, which necessarily strays from historical and scientific truth, acknowledgments can backfire. Serious scholars mentioned below should be applauded for their good work, never blamed for my tawdry divagations. The project would not have happened it all were it not for serendipitous conversations several years ago with George Dyson and Steven Horst. The following scholars (again in alphabetical order) have published work that was essential to the completion of this project. While eager to give them due credit, I am aware that they may be chagrined by my work's many excursions from historical truth. Readers who want to know what really happened should buy and read their books, while blaming the errors herein on me: Julian Barbour, Gale E. Christianson, A. Rupert Hall, David Kahn, Hans Georg Schulte-Albert, Lee Smolin, Richard Westfall, D. T. Whiteside. Particular mention must go to Fernand Braudel, to whose work this book may be considered a discursive footnote. Many other scholarly works were consulted during this project, and space does not permit mentioning them here. Of particular note is Sir Winston Spencer Churchill's six-volume biography of Marlborough, which people who are really interested in this period of history should read, and people who think that I am too long-winded should weigh. Special thanks to Béla and Gabriella Bollobás, Doug Carlston, and Tomi Pierce for providing me with access to places I could not have seen (Bollobás) or worked in (Carlston/Pierce) otherwise. George Jewsbury and Catherine Durandin and Hugo Durandin DeSousa provided timely assistance. Greg Bear lent me two books; I promise to return them! And for talking to me about gunpowder, and listening equably to the occasional rant about Alchemy, thanks to Marco Kaltofen, P. E., of the Natick Indian Plantation and Needham West Militia Companies. Helping in many ways to make this possible on the publishing end, and exhibiting superhuman patience, were Jennifer Hershey, Liz Darhansoff, Jennifer Brehl, and Ravi Mirchandani. Jeremy Bornstein, Alvy Ray Smith, and Lisa Gold read the penultimate draft and supplied useful commentary. The latter two, along with the cartographer Nick Springer, participated in creation of maps, diagrams, and family trees. More detail is to be found on the website BaroqueCycle.com. Quicksilver:An E-Book1 INTERVIEW QUICKSILVERMETAWEBINTRODUCTION QUICKSILVERDRAMATISPERSONAE BYTYPE 1E-Book Editor's Note/Apologia An electronic book published in 2004 is about as anomalous a cultural entity as they make 'em. Little loved in this, their infancy (i.e., commanding a miniscule readership within a miniscule readership: i.e., readers of books), e-books are mainly praised for their portability and tolerated by their corporate backers because they are believed to represent 'the future of publishing' (never, oddly, 'a future'; always: 'the future'). But e-book technology is rather pitiful, as compared with other things going on in the culture today: CGI movies, for example, and the Digital Versatile Discs that exercise them so fully. Computer-Generated Imagery on a DVD is fun. There's no arguing with it: point and click; plus other tricks. E-books, like the computers that you must currently employ to obtain access to them, need some puzzling-over. Still, we try. But the anomaly is there. An e-book: this digital, intuitively malleable thing: is as frozen in time as is its print 'equivalent' (as we like to say). The e-book edition of Quicksilver that you are reading, incidentally, was published many months after its first hardcover edition and may or may not have incorporated the various fixes that get made to book files as they are prepared for eventual paperback publication. (In other words, there are errors herein, but simply running spell-check was not an option.) This section of Quicksilver , asserting itself (elsewhere, in marketing copy) as a font of 'e-book extras,' and attempting to draw an analogy to the 'special features' that distinguish a DVD, is in fact a mere copy-'n'-paste job (with some styling by the editors) from online sources created by Neal Stephenson in collaboration with his publisher and others. These sources, to which we have elected not to 'live-link,' may or may not exist at the time that this e-book file has found its way into your hands (thus the election not to live-link). In which case our little effort here may serve some archival purpose, and wouldn't that be grand? With each feature that appears herein, we have noted the URL from whence, in early February of 2004, it came. Please enjoy these materials in the confines of this e-book: but, should they live on, do visit the Uniform Resource Locators we have provided and relish the many more riches that we hope are still out there. A source of particular bounty is the Quicksilver Metaweb, as introduced by Neal Stephenson nearby. Interview http://www.baroquecycle.com/interview.htm Therese Littletoninterviewed the author on July 9, 2003. Interviewer: Quicksilverincludes some of the most important events and people during a crucial nexus between historical eras. What compelled you to write about this particular time period? Neal Stephenson:Around the time that I was closing in on the end of Cryptonomicon [1999], I heard from a couple of different people about some interesting things having to do with Isaac Newton and with Gottfried Leibniz. One person pointed out to me that Newton had spent about the last thirty years of his life working at the mint, which was interesting to me. In Cryptonomicon there was a lot of stuff about money, so I had been thinking about money, anyway. The other related thing that I bumped into about the same time: I was reading a book by George Dyson, called Darwin Among the Machines.He talked a little bit about the work of Leibniz with computers. Leibniz arguably was the founder of symbolic logic and he worked with computing machines. I found it striking at a time when I was already working on a book about money and a book about computers that there were these two people 300 years ago who were quite interested in the same topics. And not only that, but they had this big, famous rivalry that supposedly was about which of them had invented the calculus first, although it was really about a lot more than that. I began to do a bit of reading about that era and immediately got excited about it because so many things were happening all at once during that time period. So, I decided that as soon as I got done with Cryptonomicon , I would turn all my efforts towards trying to write a historical piece set during that era. Interviewer:So how does the high Baroque era relate to the Enlightenment, for those of us who are historically challenged? Neal Stephenson:I didn't really have a good grip on this, either, and still don't, but it appears that the Enlightenment refers to a bunch of stuff that was triggered by a lot of thinkers who were active during the late seventeenth century. Work that was done by the Royal Society and other natural philosophers of the time, combined with other currents in politics and religion, led to this later thing called the Enlightenment, more of an eighteenth-century phenomenon. It doesn't really enter in to the book that I'm writing here. The Enlightenment, though it sounds really good, is and should be a controversial event because although it led to the flourishing of the sciences and political liberties and a lot of good stuff like that, one can also argue that it played a role in the French Revolution and some of the negative events of the time as well. Interviewer:In writing a historical novel, as opposed to a science fiction or general fiction novel, you included real-life characters. People like Leibniz, Newton, William of Orange, and Samuel Pepys all figure prominently in Quicksilver.In developing their in-book personalities, how did you decide what they were like? Did you use historical records? Neal Stephenson:I was fortunate, because this is a very well documented period of history, compared to some others, and it's documented largely in English. So it was not one of these occasions where it was necessary to learn a new language or delve into obscure historical records. I did little to no genuine original research on this. I simply availed myself of what was already out there in bookstores and libraries all over the place. So, by reading what had been written about these people both at the time and in the 300 years since then, it wasn't too hard to get a sense of what they were like and how each interacted with the other. Obviously, the result here is my interpretation of these characters. It's a work of fiction, which shouldn't be confused with history. But I've tried to make the essence of these characters faithful to what appears in the historical records. Interviewer:How about characters like Jack Shaftoe and Eliza? Were they based on anybody you came across in your reading? Neal Stephenson:They were entirely made up, but based on types that seem to have existed at that time. There was apparently a huge problem all over the place with what we would today call homeless people. They're called Vagabonds in the book. Sometimes there were more of them, and sometimes there were fewer of them, depending on what was going on in the way of wars or economic upheavals. There were encampments of people like this all over Christendom, as far as I can tell, and sometimes they would get together and rove around in big groups scaring the hell out of the citizenry. That's a pretty well-attested type of person who existed back then, and Jack is my attempt to build the story of one such Vagabond. As for Eliza, she is someone who began life as a slave of the Barbary Corsairs, which may seem kind of outlandish to us now. But it is a fact that well into the eighteenth century the Barbary states in North Africa were routinely sending raiding parties up into Europe to snatch people off of beaches and take them back into slavery. Or they were overhauling ships on the high seas, seizing the cargo, and enslaving or taking hostage the people they found on those ships. So again, in the case of Eliza, I'm taking that whole class of people and trying to build the story of one individual. Interviewer:Jack Shaftoe has an interesting disability, the nature of which makes him a perfect companion for Eliza, considering her personal history as a slave. These two have some of the most moving scenes in the book together. Are they your two favorite characters? Neal Stephenson:Well, without getting into details, the whole conceit of that relationship is that they have this bond: it's a complementary relationship that works. Even when they disagree with each other, even when they hate each other for one reason or another, there's this underlying bond between them that ties them together. I think that's true of a lot of successful relationships. I do like those two quite a bit, and that probably comes through in the book. There's also a lot to be said for some of the other characters. I like Robert Hooke, who's a real person. I like Daniel Waterhouse, who's fictitious. And some of the people on Leibniz's end of the story are also quite fascinating individuals. Sophie, the electress of Hanover, who was Leibniz's patron, appears to have been a really fascinating and cool woman. Interviewer:Just by naming so many characters, you've offered a clue about how vast this story is, and this is just the first third of the cycle. How did you organize your materials to work on this massive project? Neal Stephenson:For every book I have worked on, not only is the book different (obviously), with different characters, different story, but the system by which I write it is different, too. I always seem to have to invent a new system for writing each book. In this case I ran through a bunch of them, because I knew I had this big data-management problem. So, I started with a bunch of notebooks, just composition books, in which I would write notes down in chronological order as I read a particular book, or what have you. Those are always there, and I can go back to them and look stuff up even when it's otherwise lost. Then, I've got timelines and timetables showing what happens when in the story. I've spent a while monkeying around with three-ring binders, in which I glued pages here and there trying to figure out how to sequence things. It's a big mess. It's a big pile of stationery. Many trips to the office supply store, and many failed attempts. But in the end, as long as you can keep it in your head, that's the easiest way to manage something like this. You can move things around inside your head more easily than you can shuffle papers or cross things out on a page and rewrite them. Interviewer:You mentioned earlier that you didn't really do a lot of historical research for this book, but some of the places that you describe: such as Amsterdam: are so richly detailed in the book. Did you travel as part of your research? Neal Stephenson:I'm drawing a distinction here between what a real researcher would consider research and what a novelist calls research. So I did a lot of research in the sense of reading books and visiting some places. But none of it would be recognized by a Ph.D. history student as legitimate research. I visited several locations and sometimes that worked, and sometimes it didn't. It's a hit-or-miss proposition. To give you one example, the headquarters of the Royal Society eventually moved to a place called Crane Court, which is off of Fleet Street in London. In the final volume of the cycle, we see some action at Crane Court. So I went there when I was in London, and found the street, and walked to the end of it, which is where the headquarters were. It's sealed off by this wall of blue glass: it's this modern office structure that they've just slammed down across the end of this street. Sometimes you get lucky, and you find a building that's still standing there, and that looks the same as it did 300 years ago, and other times you find nothing at all. Interviewer:Quicksilver contains some anachronisms, mostly of speech. Obviously, you've put them in there on purpose. How do you decide to use anachronism? And why? Neal Stephenson:A person writing a historical-swashbuckler-potboiler-epic in 2003 can't pretend that this is the first such book that's ever been written. People have been writing such books for hundreds of years. The classic example would be the works of Dumas. The Count of Monte Cristo , The Three Musketeers , and so on. If you go back and look at those books, you can see that they are partly historically correct, or as close as one can come to that. But they are also partly a product of their times. When you read a Victorian swashbuckler novel set 200 years earlier, you can tell that it's a Victorian novel. It's got all this stuff in there that only Victorians would have put in. The literary style is Victorian, the diction is Victorian. And that's true, mutatis mutandis, for any historical novel written in any period. I never tried to entertain the illusion that I was going to write something that had no trace of the twentieth century or of the twenty-first century in it. It's a given that a book is going to reflect the time in which it is written. I didn't feel a strong compulsion to avoid such anachronisms, and if something came up that I thought might be funny, or that might work, I would just go ahead and slap it in there. Interviewer:Some of the more colorful characters in your book are Hooke and the other members of the Royal Society who do things like vivisection that are quite disturbing. Was that what the real Royal Society was like at that time? Neal Stephenson:As far as I can tell, that's what it was like. I mean, their records of vivisection experiments are very clear. There's no getting around the fact that they did that kind of stuff, so in a sense the easy thing would be to just reproduce that in the story and show these guys as really cruel vivisectionists. But as usual, the reality is a little more complicated and a little different. If you read the records of the Royal Society and what they were doing in the 1660s, it's clear that at a certain point, some of these people: and I think Hooke was one of them: became a little bit disgusted with themselves and began excusing themselves when one of these vivisections was going to happen. I certainly don't think they turned into hardcore animal rights campaigners, or anything close to that, but I think after a while, they got a little bit sick of it and started to feel conflicted about what they were doing. So I've tried to show that ambivalence and complication in the book. Interviewer:These characters are also heavily involved in alchemy. Was that a primary activity for the Royal Society? Neal Stephenson:Yeah. It started to come out in the twentieth century that Newton had devoted more of his time and energy to alchemy during his career than he had devoted to mathematical physics. That's a fact that is obvious enough if you look at his papers: he made no particular effort to conceal this. But it was sort of suppressed a little bit during the Enlightenment and Victorian era, when people didn't know what to make of it. They wanted to view Newton as this paragon of the scientific method, and it was difficult to fit alchemy into that structure. The view of more modern scholarship is that alchemy was all over the place. Robert Boyle was heavily involved into it; John Locke was involved in it; Newton of course; and quite a few of these other people. They didn't really observe a clean distinction between alchemy and what we now think of as the modern practice of science. I've tried to be as faithful as I can to the historical reality in the way that's depicted in the book. Interviewer:Language, and the uses of language, also figures prominently in Quicksilver.How does language work in the book to indicate social status, to keep secrets, to communicate more than what's on the surface? Neal Stephenson:In this period, of course, England was not in the middle of things. It was this little rock up in a corner of the map. I'm exaggerating slightly, but it was certainly not the case that you could go to France or someplace in the Holy Roman Empire and encounter people who knew how to speak English. English was this minor language up in the corner of Europe, but it was a very vigorous language. I find admirable the way in which these people used the English language. For better or worse, it's crept into the way I use the language now. I much prefer the way they used English in 1680 to the Victorian style of prose, which seems really stuffy and indirect to me. One of the odd consequences of this is that the English people who started the Royal Society didn't like Latin. They felt that the use of Latin in philosophical discourse was impeding progress. They wanted to get rid of it. But they couldn't with a straight face suggest that everyone use English, because it was this unknown language. So one of them: John Wilkins, who later was the Bishop of Chester, and who more than anyone else was the founder of the Royal Society: created this artificial language. He hoped it would become the standard way that philosophers, by which he meant scientists, would communicate with each other. It's all set forth in a way that's supposed to be logical and orderly. Of course it failed. Hooke and Christopher Wren used it a little bit, but they were just about the only ones. But the development of this language plays a role in Quicksilver . Wilkins is another character that I personally feel a lot of affection for. One of the curious facts about Wilkins is that twenty years earlier, he had written a book on cryptography which David Kahn, the author of The Codebreakers , has described as the first book written on cryptology in the English language. When Wilkins was a younger man living in a war-torn England, he wrote a book about how to keep secrets in a bunch of different ways. How to send secret messages and hide information. But later in his life, when England had settled down a bit politically, he turned around and tried to achieve the opposite of that. To create a system of writing that would be sort of like an anti-code. It would be so clear and logical that you could understand what it was saying even if you weren't fluent in that language. Interviewer:Speaking of languages, one of the toughest languages in your books is that of the people of Qwghlm, where Eliza's from. Is Qwghlm pronounceable? Neal Stephenson:I never say it out loud. It's like one of those languages used in southern Africa that have sounds people can't make unless they've grown up in that culture. Interviewer:What's the literary utility of using a made-up place like Qwghlm? Neal Stephenson:All I can say is that it does have utility. As soon as I came up with it, it immediately became incredibly useful. Not only in Cryptonomicon , but in the Baroque Cycle as well. It needed to be invented, and I sort of stumbled over it. It's been very useful ever since. Of course Q-W-G-H-L-M is just the transcription of the word from their writing, which is a system of simple runes optimized for people who suffer from a lot of frostbite. Interviewer:Clearly Qwghlm is a northern European country. When you imagine what this place is like, what landscapes do you see? Neal Stephenson:Towering spires of rock, some of which are underwater. It's surrounded by hazards to navigation that ships are forever running aground on. Some mudflats along the beaches. Lots of ice, and lots of guano deposited by seagulls. They claim that it was formerly richly forested, but all the trees had been chopped down by Englishmen. That is true of several parts of the British Isles, so that's not even particularly fictitious. Interviewer:What are some of the other links between Quicksilver and Cryptonomicon ? Neal Stephenson:The links are somewhat loose, so this is not one of these situations where you've got to read one of the books to make sense of the others. There's a gap of about 300 years between the Baroque Cycle and Cryptonomicon , and if you've read Cryptonomicon , you'll recognize some family names that are in common. You can infer that some of the families in the Baroque Cycle have descendents who show up later in Cryptonomicon.It's largely a family saga kind of connection. And then there's a character, Enoch Root, who possesses unnatural longevity and shows up in person in both of the books. Interviewer:So it is the same Enoch Root in both of the books? Neal Stephenson:Yes. Interviewer:How does Quicksilver fit with the rest of the Baroque Cycle? Is it exactly one-third of it? Neal Stephenson:Yes, it's about a third of the story. Quicksilver is divided internally into three separate books, and each of those books is short-to-medium novel-length. So about a third of the way through the volume, everything sort of stops and you begin a new story with some new characters, and as you go on, it becomes clear that these characters are related to the events and characters in the other books. In the second volume, which is called The Confusion , there are two separate books that are intertwined quite a bit. And in the third volume, The System of the World , there are going to be either two or three books, subdivided in the same way as in Quicksilver.The story will be fairly evenly divided among the three volumes. Interviewer:You've shown us in both Cryptonomicon and in Quicksilver that you're not afraid to have fairly abrupt and dramatic things happen to characters, up to and including death. Should we avoid getting attached to our favorite characters? Neal Stephenson:[Laughs] By all means, get attached. Get totally attached. Yeah, I'm all in favor of getting attached. Even if it ends in tears, it's still a good thing. Metaweb: Quicksilver Metaweb Introductionhttp://www.metaweb.com/wiki/wiki.phtml?title=Metaweb:Metaweb_introduction_(Neal_Stephenson) Superficially, this site looks like a set of FAQs about a novel that I wrote entitled Quicksilver.As time goes on, we hope that it will develop into something a little more than that. We don't know how it will come out. It's an experiment. Why put the information on such a complicated system, when a simple FAQ is easier? Because we are hoping that the annotations of the book on this site will seed a body of knowledge called the Metaweb, which will eventually be something more generally useful than a list of FAQs about one and only one novel. The idea of the Metaweb was originated byDanny Hillis . My own view of the Metaweb is pretty straightforward: I don't think that the Internet, as it currently exists, does a very good job of explaining things to people. It is great for selling stuff, distributing news and dirty pictures, and a few other things. But when you need to get a good explanation of something, whether it is a scientific principle, a bit of gardening advice, or how to change a tire, you have to sift through a vast number of pages to find the one that gives you the explanation that is right for you. Generally this is not a problem with the explanations themselves. On the contrary, it seems as though a lot of people like to explain things on the Internet, and some of them are quite good at it. The problem lies in how these explanations are organized. We have been looking for a way to get an explanation system seeded for a long time, and it occurred to us that a set of annotations to my book might be one way to get it started. At first, the explanations here will be strongly tied to characters and situations in Quicksilver and so may be of only limited interest to those who have not read the book. However, with a few clicks we might move on to more general explanations. For example,Robert Hooke andRobert Boyle appear as characters in Quicksilver , and so early on we might see annotations concerning specific things that they are shown doing in the book. But later these might link to explanations ofBoyle's Law.Such an explanation need not refer to Quicksilver in any way, and so it could be useful to, say, a high school student who has never heard of me or my book but who needs to understand Boyle's Law and why it is important. What it boils down to is this: if you have come here hoping to get an explanation of something that puzzles you about Quicksilver , then this site should serve that purpose. If you don't find an existing annotation that answers your question, you can request that I or someone else write one and post it. Along the way, as you browse the site, you may stumble over a lot of information that seems to have nothing to do with the novel. This material has probably been put there by contributors who have decided to post explanations of things that they care and know about. Feel free to ignore, browse, or contribute to any of it as the spirit moves you. – Neal Stephenson, 2003 QuicksilverDramatis Personae by Typehttp://www.metaweb.com/wiki/wiki.phtml?title=Stephenson:Neal:Quicksilver:List_of_people This is a list of the dramatis personae in Quicksilver who have entries in the Metaweb. As this list grows, we may group people by family, region, religion, language, title or noble status, or other methods. Clearly Major Characters Jack Shaftoe Eliza Daniel Waterhouse Enoch Root Natural Philosophers Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz Isaac Newton Spinoza Thomas More Anglesey Robert Hooke John Wilkins Nicolas Fatio de Duillier Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit Aristocrats and Politicians James I of England Oliver Cromwell Charles I of England Charles II James II of England Monmouth William of Orange Queen Anne George I of Great Britain Princess Caroline King George II of Great Britain Louis Anglesey, Earl of Upnor Louis Joseph, Duke of Vendôme (duchesse d')Oyonnax (Comte) d'Avaux (Duc) d'Arcachon Etienne d'Arcachon Edouard de Gex Bonaventure Rossignol King Phillip the V of Spain Businessmen Gomer Bolstrood Knott Bolstrood John Comstock Roger Comstock Foot Sluys Yevgeny (the Raskolnik) Very Minor Characters People mentioned only a few times with only a tiny part in the narrative. Arlanc Elias Ashmole (comte de) Béziers Beatrice Béziers Louis Béziers Mary Dolores Jack Ketch (marquise d')Ozoir Danny Shaftoe Jimmy Shaftoe Mother Shaftoe See also List of notable Baroque figures About the Author NEALSTEPHENSONissueth from a Clan of yeomen, itinerant Parsons, ingenieurs , and Natural Philosophers that hath long dwelt in bucolick marches and rural Shires of his native Land, and trod the Corridors of her 'Varsities. At a young age, finding himself in a pretty Humour for the writing of Romances, and discourse of Natural Philosophy and Technologick Arts, he took up the Pen, and hath not since laid it down. Quicksilver:Critical Acclaimfor Volume One of the Baroque Cycle TIME:“Genius. (That's right, I'm using the g-word.) ... You'll wish it were longer.' Entertainment Weekly:“[A] warm, loamy novel of ideas, adventure, science and politics ... The great trick of Quicksilver is that it makes you ponder concepts and theories you initially think you'll never understand, and it's greatest pleasure is that Stephenson is such an enthralling explainer ... Stephenson's new machine is a wonderment to behold. A-' Wired:“Neal Stephenson rewrites history: for the dark prince of hacker fiction, looking backward is another way of seeing the future.' Seattle Times:“Because of his subject matter, Stephenson won't lose his usual science-lovers. He'll pick up some history buffs as well, and his quirky characters, zestful pace, and wryly humorous tone will charm almost everyone else... Stephenson's aim is more than an entertaining account of remarkable personalities. Quicksilver's panoramic view encompasses the bitter religious and political struggles which gave rise to the scientific way of thought. [ Quicksilveris] a sprawling, engrossing tale.' Men's Journal:“ Quicksilver... tosses its three main characters into the bubbling cauldron of science and intrigue that Stephenson, like a mad alchemist, has cooked up in his lab... [A] swashbuckling pirate battle, for example, dares any reader to put down the novel and gives Quicksilver ... the decadent pacing of a beach thriller.' Newsweek:“Sprawling, irreverent, and ultimately profound.' Slate:“ Quicksilverinfuses old-school science and engineering with a badly needed dose of swashbuckling adventure, complete with a professor-versus-the-pirates battle at sea. Who knew the Natural Philosophers were so cool?' Library Journal(starred review):“Sparkling prose, subtle humor, and a superb knowledge of the period makes this grand feast of a novel a mandatory choice ... highly recommended.' Salon:“We expect nothing less from Neal Stephenson than sustained ecstatic zaniness... As seen through Stephenson's eyes the late seventeenth century is endlessly fascinating, and so is the focus on the intersection of religion and science... The late seventeenth century saw an explosion of intellectual brilliance that resembles nothing so much as it does an overflow from a boiling cauldron. So does Quicksilver .' Publishers Weekly:“Stephenson, once best known for his techno-geek SF novel Snow Crash , skillfully reimagines empiricists Newton, Hooke, and Leibniz, and creatively retells the birth of the scientific revolution. He has a strong feel for history and a knack for bringing settings to life. Expect high interest in this title, as much for its size and ambition, which make it a publishing event...' Pages:“The joy of entering le monde Stephenson is that of surrender. Give up any and all preconceived notions of historical consistency, linear scientific progress, and fail-safe happy endings, and you'll enjoy the ride ... you'll be begging for more.' ALSO BY NEAL STEPHENSON Cryptonomicon The Diamond Age Snow Crash Zodiac Credits Maps by Nick Springer Family trees created by Lisa Gold, illustrated by Jane S. Kim Conic sections illustration, a digital recomposition of eight figures from Claude Richard's 1655 edition of Apollonius of Perga's Conic Sections, by Alvy Ray Smith Case stamp art by Laura Hartman Maestro Jacket design by Richard L. Aquan Jacket illustration from Mary Evans Picture Library Map of 1667 London reproduced with changes courtesy of Historic Urban Plans, Inc. Refracting sphere illustration from the facsimile edition of Robert Hooke's Philosophical Experiments and Observations, edited by W. Derham. Published by Frank Cass & Co., Ltd., London, 1967. Flea illustration from Robert Hooke's 1665 Micrographia reprinted by permission of Octavo, www.octavo.com. Illustrations from Isaac Newton's 1729 Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy courtesy of Primary Source Microfilm. This book is a work of fiction. References to real people, events, establishments, organizations, or locales are intended only to provide a sense of authenticity, and are used fictitiously. All other characters, and all incidents and dialogue, are drawn from the author's imagination and are not to be construed as real. QUICKSILVER. Copyright © 2003 by Neal Stephenson. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of PerfectBound™. "Interview." Copyright © 2003 by Neal Stephenson "Quicksilver Metaweb: Introduction" and "Quicksilver Dramatis Personae" are licensed under the terms described below. Metaweb: Copyrights: From the Quicksilver Metaweb: The goal of the Metaweb is to create an information source that is freely available. The license we use grants free access to our content in the same sense as free software is licensed freely. That is to say, Metaweb content can be copied, modified, and redistributed so long as the new version grants the same freedoms to others and acknowledges the Metaweb as the source. Metaweb entries therefore will remain free forever and can be used by anybody subject to certain restrictions, most of which serve to ensure that freedom. To fulfill the above goals, the text contained in the Metaweb is licensed to the public under the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL). Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify the text of all Metaweb materials under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts. For the full license, see the metaweb:GNU free documentation license: http://www.metaweb.com/wiki/wiki.phtml?title=Metaweb:GNU_free_documentation_license See also the Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc. Microsoft Reader March 2004 ISBN 0-06-074831-1 FIRST EDITION 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 About the Publisher Australia HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia http://www.perfectbound.com.au Canada HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada http://www.perfectbound.ca New Zealand HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited P.O. Box 1 Auckland, New Zealand http://www.harpercollins.co.nz United Kingdom HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 77-85 Fulham Palace Road London, W6 8JB, UK http://www.uk.perfectbound.com United States HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 10 East 53rd Street New York, NY 10022 http://www.perfectbound.com * Son of Praise-God W., son of Raleigh W., son of Drakehence, some sort of nephew to Daniel. * In England, the Civil War that brought Cromwell to power, and on the Continent, the Thirty Years War. * Counterfeits made of base metals such as copper and lead. * The forecastledeck is the short deck that, towards the ships bow, is built above the upperdeck. * Praise-God W. being the eldest son of Raleigh W., and hence Drake W.s first grandchild; he had recently sailed to Boston at he age of sixteen to study at Harvard, become part of that City on the Hill that was America, and, if possible, return in glory at some future time to drive Archbishop Lauds spawn from England and reform the Anglican Church once and for all. * King Charles II of England. * Usually the Pope, but in this context, King Louis XIV of France. * The consensus of the best physicians in the Royal Society was that plague was not caused by bad air, but had something to do with being crowded together with many other people, especially foreigners (the first victims of the London plague had been Frenchmen fresh off the boat, whod died in an inn about five hundred yards from Drakes house), however, everyone breathed through scarves anyway. * Which had been pro-Cromwell. * Which had nothing to do with Jews; it was named partly after its location in a part of the city where Jews had lived before they had been kicked out of England in 1290 by Edward I. For Jews to exist in a Catholic or Anglican country was theoretically impossible because the entire country was divided into parishes, and every person who lived in a given parish, by definition, was a member of the parish church, which collected tithes, recorded births and deaths, and enforced regular attendance at services. This general sort of arrangement was called theEstablished Church and was why dissidents like Drake had no logical choice but to espouse the concept of theGathered Church , which drew like-minded persons from an arbitrary geographical territory. In making it legallypossible for Gathered Churches to exist, Cromwell had, in effect, re-admitted Jews to England. * A conical glass, wide at the top and pointed on the bottom, which when filled with cold water or (preferably) snow and left outside overnight, would condense dew on its outside; the dew would run down and drip into a receptacle underneath. * Forerunner of the Royal Society. * He was not the first person to observe it. * I.e., it was already 1665 everywhere except England, where the new year was held to begin on March 25th. * Though the fields were becoming city streets, so at this point it was more like St. Martin-at-the-edge-of-a-field, and soon to be St. Martin-within-visual-rangeof-a-very-expensive-field-or-two. * I.e., he had a sword. * The five men King Charles II had chosen to run England: John Comstock, the Earl of Epsom, Lord Chancellor; Thomas More Anglesey, Duke of Gunfleet, Chancellor of the Exchequer; Knott Bolstrood, whod been coaxed back from Dutch self-exile to serve as His Majestys Secretary of State; Sir Richard Apthorp, a banker, and a founder of the East India Company; and General Hugh Lewis, the Duke of Tweed. * Knott Bolstrood, a Barker and an old friend of Drakes, was rabidly Protestant and anti-Frenchthe King had made him Secretary of State because no one in his right mind could possibly accuse him of being a crypto-Catholic. * Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie, or Dutch East India Company. * None other than Knott Bolstrood, whod been ennobled, for protocol reasons, when the King had named him Secretary of Statethe King had chosen to make him Count Penistone because that way, Bolstrood the ultra-Puritan could not sign his name without writing the word penis. * Pansophism was a movement among Continental savants, in which the said Comenius had been an important figure; it had influenced Wilkins, Oldenburg, and others to found the Experimental Philosophical Club and later the Royal Society. * Philippe, duc dOrléans, was the younger brother of King Louis XIV of France. * Thomas Ham had been made Viscount Walbrook by the King. * A vast, turgid, incoherent compendium of alchemical lore. * Here, a moiety of the audiencemostly Cambridge undergraduatesstood up (if they werent standing to begin with) and applauded. Admittedly they wouldve come erect and shown their appreciation for almost any human female recognizable as such who appeared on the grounds of their College, but more so in this case since the role of Lydia was being played by Eleanor (Nell) Gwynthe Kings Mistress. * A grassy quadrangle surrounded by buildings of Trinity College. * Pepys being a good examplebut he wasnt there. * As King Louis XIV had guards dressed as Croats, so Charles might have Poles; any nation whose survival depended on crossing swords with Turks had a fearsome reputation nowadays. * Which, remember, is one storey below the quarterdeck, where Daniel is pretty much giving up on getting any relaxation. * That is, ahead of them and off to the side from which the wind is blowingat about ten oclock. * At about five oclock if he were facing toward the bow. * Mary Beatrice dEste of Modena; for Anne Hyde had been winched into a double-wide grave two years previously. * There are thirty-two points on the compass rose. * Jack could not read but could infer as much from the types of letters used. * The reason the pikemen didnt protectively surround the musketeers, instead of being surrounded by them, was that even if the musketeers aimed between them, or over their heads, they would get mowed down by errant balls; because if, as frequently happened, a musket ball was a bit too small for its barrel, it would take to bouncing from one side of the barrel to the other as it was propelled out, and might emerge at a sharp, startling sideways angle. * It turned out that if you did the mathematicks on a typical war, the cost of powder was more important than just about anything elseHerr Geidel insisted that the gunpowder in the arsenal of Venice, for example, was worth more than the annual revenue of the entire city. This explained a lot of oddness Jack had witnessed in various campaigns and forced him to reconsider (briefly) his opinion that all officers were mad. * Which Jack could tell by interpreting the coats of arms carved on the gateposts and embroidered on the flags. * As the trading-houses were called, because important men called factors inhabited and ran them. * E.g., Hey, Doc, how many goats were shaved to make that wig? * Just guessing, here. * Which they knew because it bore the trademark of none other than Herr Geidel. *Faulbaum , the Germans said, meaning lazy and rotten tree. They were alders. * The Doctor: Actually, it is a helix, not a spiral. * Various pieces of evidence suggested to Jack that hed been sleeping. * It being one of the many peculiar features of Jacks upbringing that (1) he had a perpetual sparring partner (Bob)perpetual in the sense that they slept in the same bed at night and, as brothers do, fought all dayagainst whom he was evenly matched, and (2) at the age when every boy engages in mock sword-fight, he and Bob happened to suddenly find themselves living in a military barracks, where their duels served as free entertainment for large numbers of men who actually did know a few things about fighting with swords, and who found the entertainment lacking if it was not well played, both in a technical sense (blows had to be delivered and parried in some way that was realistic to their discerning eyes) and in a dramatic sense (extra points scored, and extra food thrown in their direction, for enhancements such as hanging by the knees from joists and fighting upside-down, swinging like apes from ropes, etc.). The result being that from a young age the Shaftoe boys had sword-fighting abilities considerably above their station in life (most people like them never came into contact with a sword at all, unless it was with the edge of the blade in the last instant of their life), but limited to the type of sword called the spadroona cut-andthrust weaponwhich, theyd been warned, might not be very effective against Gentlemen armed with long slender poky rapiers and trained to insert them deftly through narrow gaps in ones defenses. The Janissary-blade was a rough Mahometan equivalent of a spadroon, therefore, ideally matched to Jacks style, or Bobs for that matter. He waved it around dramatically. * And of her husband, Duke Ernst August. * Louis XIV of France. * William of Orange. * William of Orange. * King Louis XIV of Francenot really Monmouths uncle, but the brother of the widower of the sister of his illegitimate father, as well as the son of the brother of his grandmother, and many other connexions besides. * A quartering of elements old (fleurs-de-lis, denoting their ancient connections to the royal family) and new (Negro-heads in iron neck-collars). * It dropped from 572 to 250 when word of Monmouths rebellion spread. * E.g., Nassau, Katsenellenbogen, Dietz, Vianden, Meurs. * The flying jib downhaul. * The Duke of Northumbria was the bastard son of Charles II by his mistress Barbara Palmer, nee Villiers, Duchess of Castlemaine. * The Duke of Richmond was the bastard son of Charles II by his mistress Louise de Kéroualle, Duchess of Portsmouth. * The Duke of St. Albans was the bastard son of Charles II by his mistress Nell Gwyn, the nubile comedienne and apple-woman. * The name of Hexagram 3 of the I Ching, or 010001, that being the encryption key for the subliminal message embedded in the script of this letter. * Darkening of the Light: Hexagram 36 of the I Ching, or 000101. * Increase: Hexagram 42 of the I Ching, or 110001. * Family: Hexagram 37 of the I Ching, or 110101. * Break-through: Hexagram 43 of the I Ching, or 011111. Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) 1670 Sir ROBERT MORAY produced a discourse concerning coffee, written by Dr. GODDARD at the King's command; which was read, and the author desired to leave a copy of it with the society. Mr. BOYLE mentioned, that he had been informed, that the much drinking of coffee produced the palsy. The bishop of Exeter seconded him, and said, that himself had found it dispose to paralytical effects; which however he thought were caused only in hot constitutions, by binding. Mr. GRAUNT affirmed, that he knew two gentlemen, great drinkers of coffee, very paralytical. Dr. WHISTLER suggested, that it might be inquired, whether the same persons took much tobacco. – THE HISTORY OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON FOR IMPROVING OF NATURAL KNOWLEDGE , JAN . 18, 1664/5* HAVING NO DESIRE to be either palsied, or paralytical, Daniel avoided the stuff until 1670, when he got his first taste of it at Mrs. Green's Coffee-House, cunningly sited in the place where the western end of the Strand yawned into Charing Cross. The Church of St. Martin-in-the-Fields lay to the west.*To the east was the New Exchange – this was the nucleus of a whole block of shops. North was Covent Garden, and South, according to rumor and tradition, was the River Thames, a few hundred yards distant – but you couldn't see it because noble Houses and Palaces formed a solid levee running from the King's residence (Whitehall Palace) all the way round the river-bend to Fleet Ditch, where the wharves began. Daniel Waterhouse walked past Mrs. Green's one summer morning in 1670, a minute after Isaac Newton had done so. It had a little garden in the front, with several tables. Daniel went into it and stood for a moment, checking out his lines of sight. Isaac had risen early, sneaked out of his bedchamber, and taken to the streets without eating any breakfast – not unusual for Isaac. Daniel had followed him out the front door of the (rebuilt, and dramatically enlarged) Waterhouse residence; across Lincoln's Inn Fields, where a few fashionable early risers were walking dogs, or huddling in mysterious conferences; and (coincidentally) right past the very place at Drury Lane and Long Acre where those two Frenchmen had died of the Black Death six years earlier, inaugurating the memorable Plague Years. Thence into the dangerous chasm of flying earth and loose paving-stones that was St. Martin's Lane – for John Comstock, Earl of Epsom, acting in his capacity as Commissioner of Sewers, had decreed that this meandering country cow-path must be paved, and made over into a city street – the axis of a whole new London. Daniel had been keeping his distance so that Isaac wouldn't notice him if he turned around – though you never knew with Isaac, who had better senses than most wild animals. St. Martin's Lane was crowded with heavy stone-carts drawn by teams of mighty horses, just barely under the control of their teamsters, and Daniel was forced to dodge wagons, and to scurry around and over piles of dirt and cobbles, in order to keep sight of Isaac. Once they had reached the open spaces of Charing Cross, and the adjoining Yard where Kings of Scotland had once come to humble themselves before their liege-lord in Whitehall, Daniel could afford to maintain more distance – Isaac's silver hair was easy to pick out in a crowd. And if Isaac's destination was one of the shops, coffee-houses, livery stables, gardens, markets, or noblemen's houses lining the great Intersection, why, Daniel could sit down right about here and spy on him at leisure. Whyhe was doing so, Daniel had no idea. It was just that by getting up and leaving so mysteriously, Isaac begged to be followed. Not that he was doing a good job of being sneaky. Isaac was accustomed to being so much brighter than everyone else that he really had no idea of what others were or weren't capable of. So when he got it into his head to be tricky, he came up with tricks that would not deceive a dog. It was hard not to be insulted – but being around Isaac was never for the thin-skinned. They continued to live together at Trinity, though now they shared a cottage without the Great Gate. They performed experiments with lenses and prisms, and Isaac went to a hall twice a week and lectured to an empty room on mathematical topics so advanced that no one else could understand them. So in that sense nothing was different. But lately Isaac had obviously lost interest in optics (probably because he knew everything about the subject now) and become mysterious. Then three days ago he had announced, with studied nonchalance, that he was going to nip down to London for a few days. When Daniel had announced that he was planning to do the same – to pay a visit to poor Oldenburg, and attend a Royal Society meeting – Isaac had done a poor job of hiding his annoyance. But he had at least tried to hide it, which was touching. Then, halfway to London, Daniel (as a sort of experiment) had professed to be shocked that Isaac intended to lodge in an inn. Daniel would not hear of it – not when Raleigh had put so many Waterhouse assets into constructing a large new house on Holborn. At this point Isaac's eyes had bulged even more than usual and he had adopted his suffering-martyr look, and relented only when Daniel mentioned that Raleigh's house was so large, and had so many empty rooms, that Daniel wasn't sure if they would ever see each other. Daniel's hypothesis, based on these observations, was that Isaac was committing Sins Against Nature with someone, but then certain clues (such as that Isaac never received any mail) argued against this. As he stood there in front of the coffee-house, a gentleman*rode out of St. Martin's Lane, reined in his horse, stood up in the stirrups, and surveyed the ongoing low-intensity riot that was Charing Cross, looking anxious until he caught sight of whatever he was looking for. Then he relaxed, sat down, and rode slowly in the general direction of – Isaac Newton. Daniel sat down in that wee garden in front of Mrs. Green's, and ordered coffee and a newspaper. King Carlos II of Spain was both feeble and sick, and not expected to live out the year. Comenius was dying, too. Anne Hyde, the Duke of York's wife, was very ill with what everyone assumed to be syphilis. John Locke was writing a constitution for Carolina, Stenka Razin's Cossack rebellion was being crushed in the Ukraine, the Grand Turk was taking Crete away from Venice with his left hand and declaring war on Poland with his right. In London, the fall of pepper prices was sending many City merchants into bankruptcy – while a short distance across the Narrow Seas, the V.O.C. – the Dutch East India Company – was paying out a dividend of 40 percent. But the news was of the doings of the CABAL*and the courtiers. John Churchill was one of the few courtiers who actually did things like go to Barbary and go mano a mano with heathen corsairs, and so there was plenty concerning him. He and most of the rest of the English Navy were blockading Algiers, trying to do something, at long last, about the Barbary Pirates. The gentleman on horseback had a courtier look about him, though unfashionably battered and frayed. He had nearly ridden Daniel down a few minutes previously when Daniel had emerged from Raleigh's house and foolishly planted himself in the middle of the road trying to catch sight of Isaac. He had the general look of a poor baron from some slaty place in the high latitudes who wanted to make a name for himself in London but lacked the means. He was dressed practically enough in actual boots, rather than the witty allusions to boots worn by young men about town. He wore a dark cassock – a riding garment loosely modeled after a priest's tent-like garment – with numerous silver buttons. He had an expensive saddle on a mediocre horse. The horse thus looked something like a fishwife dressed up in a colonel's uniform. If Isaac was looking for a mistress (or a master or whatever the sodomitical equivalent of a mistress was), he could've done worse and he could've done better. Daniel had brought a Valuable Object with him – not because he'd expected to use it, but out of fear that one of Raleigh's servants would wreck or steal it. It was in a wooden case buckled shut, which he had set on the table. He undid the buckles, raised the lid, and peeled back red velvet to divulge a tubular device about a foot long, fat enough that you could insert a fist, closed at one end. It was mounted on a wooden sphere the size of a large apple, and the sphere was held in a sort of clamp that gave it freedom to rotate around all axes – i.e., you could set it down on a tabletop and then point the open end of the tube in any direction, which was how Daniel used it. Bored through the tube's wall near the open end was a finger-sized hole, and mounted below this, in the center of the tube, was a small mirror, angled backwards at a concave dish of silvered glass that sealed the butt of the tube. The design was Isaac's, certain refinements and much of the construction were Daniel's. Putting an eye to the little hole, he saw a colored blur. Adjusting a thumbscrew at the mirror end, and thereby collapsing the tube together a bit, he resolved the blur into a chunk of ornamented window-frame with a lace curtain being sucked out of it, down at the other end of Charing Cross. Daniel was startled to realize that he was looking all the way across the Great Court that lay before Whitehall Palace, and peering in through someone's windows – unless he was mistaken, these were the apartments of Lady Castlemaine, the King of England's favorite mistress. Nudging it round to a slightly different bearing, he saw the end of the Banqueting House, where King Charles I had been beheaded, back when Daniel had been small – Divine Right of Kings demolished, the Commonwealth founded, Free Enterprise introduced, Drake happy for once, and Daniel sitting on his shoulders, watching the King's head rock. In those days, all of Whitehall's windows that faced the outside had been bricked up to keep musket-balls out, and many superstitious fopperies, e.g., paintings and sculptures, had been crated up and sold to Dutchmen. But now the windows were windows again, and the artworks had been bought back, and there wasn't a decapitated King in sight. So it was not a good time to reminisce about Drake. Daniel swiveled the Reflecting Telescope around until the ragged plume in the horseman's hat showed up as a bobbing white blur, like the tail of a hustling rabbit. Once he'd focused on that, a couple of tiny adjustments brought Isaac's waterfall of argent hair into view – just in time, for he was ascending a few steps into a building across from the Haymarket, along the convergence of traffic that eventually became Pall Mall. Daniel played the telescope around the front of the building, expecting it to be a coffee-house or pub or inn where Isaac would await his gentleman friend. But he was completely wrong. To begin with, this place was apparently nothing more than a town-house. And yet well-dressed men came and went occasionally, and when they emerged, they (or their servants) were carrying packages. Daniel reckoned it must be some sort of shop too discreet to announce itself – hardly unusual in this part of London, but not Isaac's sort of place. The horseman did not go inside. He rode past the shop once, twice, thrice, looking at it sidelong – just as baffled as Daniel was. Then he seemed to be talking to a pedestrian. Daniel recalled, now, that this rider had been pursued by a couple of servants on foot. One of these pages, or whatever they were, now took off at a run, and weaved between hawkers and hay-wains all the way across Charing Cross and finally vanished into the Strand. The horseman dismounted, handed the reins to another page, and made a vast ceremony of unbuttoning his sleeves so that the cassock devolved into a cloak. He peeled off spatterdashes to reveal breeches and stockings that were only out-moded by six months to a year, and then found a coffee-house of his own, just across Pall Mall from the mysterious shop, along (therefore) the southern limit of St. James's Fields – one of those Fields that the Church of St. Martin had formerly been in the middle of. But now houses were being built all around it, enclosing a little rectangle of farmland rapidly being gardenized. Daniel could do nothing but sit. As a way of paying rent on this chair, he kept having more coffee brought out. The first sip had been tooth-looseningly unpleasant, like one of those exotic poisons that certain Royal Society members liked to brew. But he was startled to notice after a while that the cup was empty. This whole exercise had begun rather early in the day when no one of quality was awake, and when it was too cold and dewy to sit at the outdoor tables anyway. But as Daniel sat and pretended to read his newspaper, the sun swung up over York House and then Scotland Yard, the place became comfortable, and Personages began to occupy seats nearby, and to pretend to read their newspapers. He even sensed that in this very coffee-house were some members of the cast of characters he had heard about while listening to his siblings talk over the dinner table. Actually being here and mingling with them made him feel like a theatregoer relaxing after a performance with the actors – and in these racy times, actresses. Daniel spent a while trying to spy into the upper windows of the mystery-shop with his telescope, because he thought he'd glimpsed silver hair in one of them, and so for a while he was only aware of other customers' comings and goings by their bow-waves of perfume, the rustling of ladies' crinolines, the ominous creaking of their whalebone corset-stays, the whacking of gentlemen's swords against table-legs as they misjudged distances between furniture, the clacking of their slap-soled booties. The perfumes smelled familiar, and he had heard all of the jokes before, while dining at Raleigh's house. Raleigh, who at this point was fifty-two years old, knew a startling number of dull persons who evidently had nothing else to do but roam around to one another's houses, like mobs of Vagabonds poaching on country estates, and share their dullness with each other. Daniel was always startled when he learned that these people were Knights or Barons or merchant-princes. 'Why, if it isn't Daniel Waterhouse! God save the King!' 'God save the King!' Daniel murmured reflexively, looking up into a vast bursting confusion of clothing and bought hair, within which, after a brief search, he was able to identify the face of Sir Winston Churchill – Fellow of the Royal Society, and father of that John Churchill who was making such a name for himself in the fighting before Algiers. There was a moment of exquisite discomfort. Churchill had remembered, a heartbeat too late, that the aforementioned King had personally blown up Daniel's father. Churchill himself had many anti-Royalists in his family, and so he prided himself on being a little defter than that . Now Drake's pieces had never been found. Daniel's vague recollection (vague because he'd just been shot with a blunderbuss, at the time) was that the explosion had flung him in the general direction of the Great Fire of London, so it was unlikely that anything was left of him except for a stubborn film of greasy ash deposited on the linens and windowsills of downwind neighbors. Discovery of shatteredyou and i are but earth crockery in remains of burnt houses confirmed it. John Wilkins (still distraught over the burning of his Universal Character books in the Fire) had been good enough to preside over the funeral, and only a bridge-builder of his charm and ingenuity could have prevented it from becoming a brawl complete with phalanxes of enraged Phanatiques marching on Whitehall Palace to commit regicide. Since then – and since most of Drake's fortune had passed to Raleigh – Daniel hadn't seen very much of the family. He'd been working on optics with Newton and was always startled, somehow, to find that the other Waterhouses were doing things when he wasn't watching. Praise-God, Raleigh's eldest son, who had gone to Boston before the Plague, had finally gotten his Harvard degree and married someone, and so everyone (Waterhouses and their visitors alike) had been talking about him – but they always did so mischievously, like naughty children getting away with something, and with occasional furtive glances at Daniel. He had to conclude that he and Praise-God were now the last vestiges of Puritanism in the family and that Raleigh was discreetly admired, among the coffee-house set, for having stashed one of them away at Cambridge and the other at Harvard where they could not interfere in whatever it was that the other Waterhouses were up to. In this vein: he had gotten the impression, from various tremendously significant looks exchanged across tables at odd times by his half-siblings, their extended families, and their overdressed visitors, that the Waterhouses and the Hams and perhaps a few others had joined together in some kind of vast conspiracy the exact nature of which wasn't clear – but to them it was as huge and complicated as, say, toppling the Holy Roman Empire. Thomas Ham was now called Viscount Walbrook. All of his gold had melted in the Fire, but none had leaked out of his newly refurbished cellar – when they came back days later they found a slab of congealed gold weighing tons, the World's Largest Gold Bar. None of his depositors lost a penny. Others hastened to deposit their gold with the incredibly reliable Mr. Ham. He began lending it to the King to finance the rebuilding of London. Partly in recognition of that, and partly to apologize for having blown up his father-in-law, the King had bestowed an Earldom on him. All of which was Context for Daniel as he sat there gazing upon the embarrassed face of Sir Winston Churchill. Now if Churchill had only asked, Daniel might have told him that blowing up Drake was probably the correct action for the King to have taken under the circumstances. But Churchill didn't ask, he assumed. Which was why he'd never make a real Natural Philosopher. Though the Royal Society would tolerate him as long as he continued paying his dues. Daniel for his part was aware, now, that he was surrounded by the Quality, and that they were all peering at him. He had gotten himself into a Complicated Situation, and he did not like those. The Reflecting Telescope was resting on the table right in front of him, as obvious as a severed head. Sir Winston was too embarrassed to've noticed it yet, but he would , and given that he'd been a member of the Royal Society since before the Plague, he would probably be able to guess what it was – and even if Daniel lied to him about it, the lie would be discovered this very evening when Daniel presented it, on Isaac's behalf, to the Royal Society. He felt an urge to snatch it away and hide it, but this would only make it more conspicuous. And Sir Winston was only one of the people Daniel recognized here. Daniel seemed to have inadvertently sat down along a major game trail: persons coming up from Whitehall Palace and Westminster to buy their stockings, gloves, hats, syphilis-cures, et cetera at the New Exchange, just a stone's throw up the Strand, all passed by this coffee-house to get a last fix on what was or wasn't in fashion. Daniel hadn't moved or spoken in what seemed like ten minutes . . . he was (glancing at the telltale coffee cup here) paralyzed, in fact! Then he solved Sir Winston's etiquette jam by blurting something like 'I say !' and attempting to stand up, which came out as a palsied spasm of the entire body – he got into a shin-kicking match with his own table and produced a disturbance that sheared cups off their saucers. Everyone looked. 'Ever the diligent Natural Philosopher, Mr. Waterhouse pursues an experiment in Intoxication by Coffee!' Sir Winston announced roundly. Simply tremendous laughter and light applause. Sir Winston was of Raleigh's generation and had fought in the Civil War as a Cavalier – he was a serious man and so was dressed in a way that passed for dignified and understated here, in a black velvet coat, flaring out to just above the knee, with lace handkerchiefs trailing from various openings like wisps of steam, and a yellow waistcoat under that, and God only knew what else beneath the waistcoat – the sleeves of all these garments terminated near the elbows in huge wreaths of lace, ruffles, et cetera, and that was to show off his tan kid gloves. He had a broad-brimmed Cavalier-hat fringed with fluffy white stuff probably harvested from the buttocks of some bird that spent a lot of time sitting on ice floes, and a very thin mustache, and a wig of yellow hair, expensively disheveled and formed into bobbling ringlets. He had black stockings fashionably wrinkled up his calves, and high-heeled shoes with bows of a wingspan of eight inches. The stocking/breech interface was presumably somewhere around his knees and was some sort of fantastically complex spraying phenomenon of ribbons and gathers and skirtlets designed to peek out under the hems of his coat, waistcoat, and allied garments. Mrs. Churchill, for her part, was up to something mordant involving a Hat. It had the general outlines of a Puritan-hat, a Pilgrimish number consisting of a truncated cone mounted on a broad flat brim, but enlivened with colorful bands, trailing ribbons, jeweled badges, curious feathers, and other merchandise – a parody, then, a tart assertion of non-pilgrimhood. Everything from the brim of this hat to the hem of her dress was too complex for Daniel's eye to comprehend – he was like an illiterate savage staring at the first page of an illuminated Bible – but he did notice that the little boy carrying her train was dressed as a Leprechaun (Sir Winston did a lot of business for the King in Ireland). It was a lot to put on, just to nip out for a cup of coffee, but the Churchills must have known that everyone was going to be fawning over them today because of their gallant son, and decided they ought to dress for it. Mrs. Churchill was looking over Daniel's shoulder, toward the street. This left Daniel free to stare at her face, to which she had glued several spots of black velvet – which, since the underlying skin had been whitened with some kind of powerful cosmetic, gave her a sort of Dalmatian appearance. 'He's here,' she said to whomever she was looking at. Then, confused: 'Were you expecting your half-brother?' Daniel turned around and recognized Sterling Waterhouse, now about forty, and his wife of three years, Beatrice, and a whole crowd of persons who'd apparently just staged some type of pillaging-raid on the New Exchange. Sterling and Beatrice were shocked to see him. But they had no choice but to come over, now that Mrs. Churchill had done what she'd done. So they did, cheerfully enough, and then there was a series of greetings and introductions and other formalities (including that all parties congratulated the Churchills on the dazzling qualities of their son John, and promised to say prayers for his safe return from the shores of Tripoli) extending to something like half an hour. Daniel wanted to slash his own throat. These people were doing what they did for a living. Daniel wasn't. But he did achieve one insight that would prove useful in later dealings with his own family. Because Raleigh was involved in the mysterious Conspiracy of which Daniel had, lately, become vaguely aware, it probably had something to do with land. Because Uncle Thomas (“Viscount Walbrook') Ham was mixed up in it, it must have something to do with putting rich people's money to clever uses. And because Sterling was involved, it probably had something to do with shops, because ever since Drake had ascended into the flames over London, Sterling had been moving away from Drake's style of business (smuggling, and traveling around cutting private deals away from markets) and towards the newfangled procedure of putting all the merchandise in a fixed building and waiting for customers to transport themselves to it. The whole thing came together complete in Daniel's head when he sat in that coffeehouse in Charing Cross and looked at the courtiers, macaronis, swells, and fops streaming in from the new town-houses going up on land that had been incinerated, or that had been open pastures, four years earlier. They were planning some sort of real estate development on the edge of the city – probably on that few acres of pasture out back of the Waterhouse residence. They would put up town-houses around the edges, make the center into a square, and along the square Sterling would put up shops. Rich people would move in, and the Waterhouses and their confederates would control a patch of land that would probably generate more rent than any thousand square miles of Ireland – basically, they would become farmers of rich people. And what made it extraordinarily clever – as only Sterling could be – was that this project would not even be a struggle as such. They would not have to defeat any adversary or overcome any obstacle – merely ride along with certain inexorable trends. All they – all Sterling – had to do was notice these trends. He'd always had a talent for noticing – which was why his shops were so highly thought of – so all he needed was to be in the right place to do the necessary noticing, and the right place was obviously Mrs. Green's coffee-house. But it was the wrong place for Daniel, who only wanted to notice what Isaac was up to. A lively conversation was underway all round him, but it might as well've been in a foreign language – in fact, frequently it was. Daniel divided his time between looking at the telescope and wondering when he could snatch it off the table without attracting attention; staring at the mystery-shop and at the gentleman-rider; fraternal staredowns with Sterling (who was in his red silk suit with silver buttons today, and had numerous scraps of black glued to his face, though not as many as Beatrice); and watching Sir Winston Churchill, who looked equally bored, distracted, and miserable. At one point he caught Sir Winston gazing fixedly at the telescope, his eyes making tiny movements and focusings as he figured out how it worked. Daniel waited until Sir Winston looked up at him, ready with a question – then Daniel winked and shook his head minutely. Sir Winston raised his eyebrows and looked thrilled that he and Daniel now had a small Intrigue of their own – it was like having a pretty seventeen-year-old girl unexpectedly sit on his lap. But this exchange was fully noticed by someone of Sterling's crowd – one of Beatrice's young lady friends – who demanded to know what the Tubular Object was. 'Thank you for reminding me,' Daniel said, 'I'd best put it away.' 'What is it?' the lady demanded. 'A Naval Device,' Sir Winston said, 'or a model of one – pity the Dutch Fleet when Mr. Waterhouse's invention is realized at full scale!' 'How's it work?' 'This is not the place,' said Sir Winston significantly, eyes rattling back and forth in a perfunctory scan for Dutch spies. This caused all of the other heads to turn, which led to an important Sighting: an entourage was migrating out of the Strand and into Charing Cross, and someone frightfully significant must be in the middle of it. While they were all trying to figure out who, Daniel put the telescope away and closed the box. 'It's the Earl of Upnor,' someone whispered, and then Daniel had to look, and see what had become of his former roommate. The answer: now that Louis Anglesey, Earl of Upnor, was in London, freed from the monastic constraints of Cambridge, and a full twenty-two years of age, he was able to live, and dress, as he pleased. Today, walking across Charing Cross, he was wearing a suit that appeared to've been constructed by (1) dressing him in a blouse with twenty-foot-long sleeves of the most expensive linen; (2) bunching the sleeves up in numerous overlapping gathers on his arms; (3) painting most of him in glue; (4) shaking and rolling him in a bin containing thousands of black silk doilies; and (5) (because King Charles II, who'd mandated, a few years earlier, that all courtiers wear black and white, was getting bored with it, but had not formally rescinded the order) adding dashes of color here and there, primarily in the form of clusters of elaborately gathered and knotted ribbons – enough ribbon, all told, to stretch all the way to whatever shop in Paris where the Earl had bought all of this stuff. The Earl also had a white silk scarf tied round his throat in such a way as to show off its lacy ends. Louis XIV's Croatian mercenaries, les Cravates, had made a practice of tying their giant, flapping lace collars down so that gusts of wind would not blow them up over their faces in the middle of a battle or duel, and this had become a fashion in Paris, and the Earl of Upnor, always pushing the envelope, was now doing the cravate thing with a scarf instead of an (as of ten minutes ago) outmoded collar. He had a wig that was actually wider than his shoulders, and a pair of boots that contained enough really good snow-white leather that, if pulled on straight, they would have reached all the way to his groin, at which point each one of them would have been larger in circumference than his waist; but he had of course folded the tops down and then (since they were so long) folded them back up again to keep them from dragging on the ground, so that around each knee was a complex of white leather folds about as wide as a bushel-basket, filled with a froth of lace. Gold spurs, beset with jewels, curved back from each heel to a distance of perhaps eight inches. The heels themselves were cherry-red, four inches high, and protected from the muck of Charing Cross by loose slippers whose flat soles dragged on the ground and made clacking noises with each step. Because of the width of his boot-tops, the Earl had to swing his legs around each other with each step, toes pointed, rolling so violently from side to side that he could only maintain balance with a long, encrusted, beribboned walking-stick. For all that, he made excellent headway, and his admirers in the garden of the coffee-house had only a few moments in which to memorize the details. Daniel secured the Reflecting Telescope and then looked across the square, wanting to regain sight of the strange gentleman who'd been following Isaac. But that fellow was no longer sitting in the coffee-house opposite. Daniel feared that he'd lost the man's trail – until he happened to glance back at the Earl of Upnor, and noticed that his entourage was parting to admit, and swallow up, none other than the same gentleman rider. Daniel, unencumbered by sword, giant flaring boots, or clacking boot-protectors, very quickly rose and stepped out of Mrs. Green's without bothering to excuse himself. He did not walk directly towards Upnor, but plotted a course to swing wide around his group, as if going to an errand on the other side of Charing Cross. As he drew close, he observed the following: the gentleman dismounted and approached the Earl, smiling confidently. Proud of himself, showing big mossy teeth. While the rider bowed, Upnor glanced, and nodded, at one of his hangers-on. This man stepped in from the side, bending low, and made a sweeping gesture aimed at one of Upnor's boots. Something flew from his hand and struck the top of the boot. In the same moment, this fellow extended his index finger and pointed to it: a neat dollop of brown stuff the size of a guinea coin. Everyone except the Earl of Upnor and the gentleman rider gasped in horror. 'What is it?' the Earl inquired. 'Your boot!' someone exclaimed. 'I cannot see it,' the Earl said, 'the boot-tops obstruct my view.' Supporting himself with the walking-stick, he extended one leg out in front of himself and pointed the toe. Everyone in Charing Cross could see it now, including the Earl. 'You have got shit on my boot!' he announced. 'Shall I have to kill you?' The rider was nonplussed; he hadn't come close enough to get shit on anyone – but the only other people who could testify to that were the Earl's friends. Looking around, all he could see were the rouged and black-patched faces of the Earl's crowd glowering at him. 'Whyever would you say such a thing, my lord?' ' Fight a duel with you,I should say – which would presumably mean killing you. Everyone I fight a duel with seems to die – why should you be any exception?' 'Why a . . . duel, my lord?' 'Because to extract an apology from you seems impossible. Even my dog is apologetic. But you! Why can you not show that you are ashamed of your actions?' 'My actions . . .' 'You have got shit on my boot!' 'My lord, I fear you have been misinformed.' Veryugly noises now from the entourage. 'Meet me tomorrow morning at Tyburn. Bring a second – someone strong enough to carry you away when I'm finished.' The rider finally understood that claiming innocence was getting him nowhere. 'But I can show that I am ashamed, my lord.' 'Really? E'en like a dog?' 'Yes, my lord.' 'When my dog gets shit in the wrong place, I rub his nose in it,' said the Earl, extending his pointed toe again, so it was nearly in the rider's face. Daniel was now walking nearly behind the rider, no more than twelve feet distant, and could clearly see a stream of urine form in the crotch of his breeches and pizzle out onto the road. 'Please, my lord. I did as you asked. I followed the white-haired man – I sent the message. Why are you doing this to me?' But the Earl of Upnor fixed his stare on the rider, and raised his boot an inch. The rider bowed his head – lowered his nose toward it – but then the Earl slowly lowered his boot until it was on the ground, forcing the other to bend low, then clamber down onto his knees, and finally to put his elbows into the dirt, in order to put his nose exactly where the Earl wanted it. Then it was over, and the gentleman rider was running out of Charing Cross with his face buried in his hands, presumably never to be seen in London again – which must have been exactly what the Earl wanted. The Earl, for his part, shed his entourage at a tavern, and went alone into the same shop as Isaac Newton. Daniel, by that point, wasn't even certain that Isaac was still in there. He walked by the front of it once and finally saw a tiny sign in the window: monsieur lefebure – chymist . Daniel roamed around Charing Cross for the next half an hour, glancing into M. LeFebure's windows from time to time, until he finally caught sight of silver-haired Isaac framed in a window, deep in conversation with Louis Anglesey, the Earl of Upnor, who only nodded, and nodded, and (for good measure) nodded again, rapt. Much as the sun had burnt its face into Isaac's retinas at Woolsthorpe, this image remained before Daniel long after he had turned his back upon Charing Cross and stalked away. He walked for a long time through the streets, shifting the burden of the telescope from one shoulder to the other from time to time. He was headed generally toward Bishopsgate, where there was a meeting to attend. He was pursued and harried the whole way by a feeling, difficult to identify, until at last he recognized it as a sort of jealousy. He did not know what Isaac was up to in the house/shop/laboratory/salon of M. LeFebure. He suspected Alchemy, Buggery, or some ripe warm concoction thereof: and if not, then a flirtation with same. Which was wholly Isaac's business and not Daniel's. Indeed, Daniel had no interest in either of those pastimes. To feel jealous was, therefore, foolish. And yet he did. Isaac had, somehow, found friends in whom he could confide things he hid from Daniel. There it was, simple and painful as a smack in the gob. But Daniel had friends of his own. He was going to see them now. Some were no less fraudulent, or foolish, than Alchemists. Perhaps Isaac was only giving him his just deserts for that. Royal Society Meeting, Gresham's College 12 AUGUST 1670 This Club of Vertuoso's, upon a full Night, when some eminent Maggot-monger, for the Satisfaction of the Society, had appointed to demonstrate the Force of Air, by some hermetical Pot gun, to shew the Difference of the Gravity between the Smoak of Tobacco and that of Colts-foot and Bittany, or to try some other such like Experiment, were always compos'd of such an odd Mixture of Mankind, that, like a Society of Ringers at a quarterly Feast, here sat a fat purblind Philosopher next to a talkative Spectacle-maker; yonder a half-witted Whim of Quality, next to a ragged Mathematician; on the other Side a consumptive Astronomer next to a water-gruel Physician; above them, a Transmutator of Metals, next to a Philosopher-Stone-Hunter; at the lower End, a prating Engineer, next to a clumsy-fisted Mason; at the upper End of all, perhaps, an Atheistical Chymist, next to a whimsy-headed Lecturer; and these the learned of the Wise-akers wedg'd here and there with quaint Artificers, and noisy Operators, in all Faculties; some bending beneath the Load of Years and indefatigable Labour, some as thin-jaw'd and heavy-ey'd, with abstemious Living and nocturnal Study as if, like Pharaoh's Lean Kine, they were designed by Heaven to warn the World of a Famine; others looking as wild, and disporting themselves as frenzically, as if the Disappointment of their Projects had made them subject to a Lunacy. When they were thus met, happy was the Man that could find out a new Star in the Firmament; discover a wry Step in the Sun's Progress; assign new Reasons for the Spots of the Moon, or add one Stick to the Bundle of Faggots which have been so long burthensome to the back of her old Companion; or, indeed, impart any crooked Secret to the learned Society, that might puzzle their Brains, and disturb their Rest for a Month afterwards, in consulting upon their Pillows how to straiten the Project, that it might appear upright to the Eye of Reason, and the knotty Difficulty to be rectify'd, as to bring Honour to themselves, and Advantage to the Public. – NED WARD , The Vertuoso's Club AUGUST 12. AT A MEETING of the SOCIETY, MR. NICHOLAS MERCATOR and MR. JOHN LOCKE were elected and admitted. The rest of Mr. BOYLE's experiments about light were read, with great satisfaction to the society; who ordered, that all should be registered, and that Mr. HOOKE should take care of having the like experiments tried before the society, as soon as he could procure any shining rotten wood or fish. Dr. CROUNE brought in a dead parakeet. Sir JOHN FINCH displayed an asbestos hat-band. Dr. ENT speculated as to why it is hotter in summer than winter. Mr. POWELL offered to be employed by the society in any capacity whatever. Mr. OLDENBURG being absent, Mr. WATERHOUSE read a letter from a PORTUGUESE nobleman, most civilly complimenting the society for its successes in removing the spleens of dogs, without ill effect; and going on to enquire, whether the society might undertake to perform the like operation on his Wife, as she was most afflicted with splenetic distempers. Dr. ENT was put in mind of an account concerning oysters. Mr. HOOKE displayed an invention for testing whether a surface is level, consisting of a bubble of air trapped in a sealed glass tube, otherwise filled with water. The Dog, that had a piece of his skin cut off at the former meeting, being enquired after, and the operator answering, that he had run away, it was ordered, that another should be provided against the next meeting for the grafting experiment. The president produced from Sir WILLIAM CURTIUS a hairy ball found in the belly of a cow. THE DUKE OF GUNFLEET produced a letter of Mons. HUYGENS, dated at Paris, mentioning a new observation concerning Saturn, made last spring at Rome by one CAMPANI, viz. that the circle of Saturn had been seen to cast a shadow on the sphere: which observation Mons. HUYGENS looked on as confirming his hypothesis, that Saturn is surrounded by a Ring. A Vagabond presented himself, who had formerly received a shot into his belly, breaking his guts in two: whereupon one end of the colon stood out at the left side of his belly, whereby he voided all his excrement, which he did for the society. Mr. POVEY presented a skeleton to the society. Mr. BOYLE reported that swallows live under frozen water in the Baltic. Dr. GODDARD mentioned that wainscotted rooms make cracking noises in mornings and evenings. Mr. WALLER mentioned that toads come out in moist cool weather. Mr. HOOKE related, that he had found the stars in Orion's belt, which Mons. HUYGENS made but three, to be five. Dr. MERRET produced a paper, wherein he mentioned, that three skulls with the hair on and brains in them were lately found at Black-friars in pewter vessels in the midst of a thick stone-wall, with certain obscure inscriptions. This paper was ordered to be registered. Mr. HOOKE made an experiment to discover, whether a piece of steel first counterpoised in exact scales, and then touched by a vigorous magnet, acquires thereby any sensible increase in weight. The event was, that it did not. Dr. ALLEN gave an account of a person, who had lately lost a quantity of his brain, and yet lived and was well. Dr. WILKINS presented the society with his book, intitled, An Essay Towards a Real Character and Philosophical Language. Mr. HOOKE suggested, that it was worth inquiry, whether there were any valves in plants, which he conceived to be very necessary for the conveying of the juices of trees up to the height of sometimes 200, 300, and more feet; which he saw not how it was possible to be performed without valves as well as motion. Sir ROBERT SOUTHWELL presented for the repository a skull of an executed person with the moss grown on it in Ireland. THE BISHOP OF CHESTER moved, that Mr. HOOKE might be ordered to try, whether he could by means of the microscopic moss-seed formerly shewn by him, make moss grow on a dead man's skull. Mr. HOOKE intimated that the experiment proposed by THE BISHOP OF CHESTER would not be as productive of new Knowledge, as a great many others that could be mentioned, if there were time enough to mention them all. Mr. OLDENBURG being absent, Mr. WATERHOUSE read an extract, which the former had received from Paris, signifying that it was most certain, that Dr. DE GRAAF had unravelled testicles, and that one of them was kept by him in spirit of wine. Some of the physicians present intimating, that the like had been attempted in England many years before, but not with that success, that they could yet believe what Dr. DE GRAAF affirmed. THE DUKE OF GUNFLEET gave of Dr. DE GRAAF an excellent Character; attesting that, while at Paris, this same Doctor had cured the Duke's son (now the EARL OF UPNOR) of the bite of a venomous spyder . Occasion being given to speak of tarantulas, some of the members said, that persons bitten by them, though cured, yet must dance once a year: others, that different patients required different airs to make them dance, according to the different sorts of tarantulas which had bitten them. THE DUKE OF GUNFLEET said, that the Spyder that had bitten his son in Paris, was not of the tarantula sort, and accordingly that the Earl does not under any account suffer any compulsion to dance. The society gave order for the making of portable barometers, contrived by Mr. BOYLE, to be sent into several parts of the world, not only into the most distant places of England, but likewise by sea into the East and West Indies, and other parts, particularly to the English plantations in Bermuda, Jamaica, Barbados, Virginia, and New England; and to Tangier, Moscow, St. Helena, the Cape of Good Hope, and Scanderoon. Dr. KING was put in mind of dissecting a lobster and an oyster. Mr. HOOKE produced some plano-convex spherical glasses, as small as pin-heads, to serve for object-glasses in microscopes. He was desired to put some of them into the society's great microscope for a trial. THE DUKE OF GUNFLEET produced the skin of a Moor tanned. Mr. BOYLE remarked, that two very able physicians of his acquaintance gave to a woman desperately sick of the iliac passion above a pound of crude quicksilver which remained several days in her body without producing any fatal symptom; and afterwards dissecting the dead corpse, they found, that part of her gut, where the excrement was stopped, gangrened; but the quicksilver lay all on a heap above it, and had not so much as discoloured the parts of the gut contiguous to it. Mr. HOOKE was put in mind of an experiment of making a body heavier than gold, by putting quicksilver to it, to see, whether any of it would penetrate into the pores of gold. Dr. CLARKE proposed, that a man hanged might be begged of the King, to try to revive him; and that in case he were revived, he might have his life granted him. Mr. WATERHOUSE produced a new telescope, invented by Mr. Isaac NEWTON, professor of mathematics in the university of Cambridge, improving on previous telescopes by contracting the optical path. THE DUKE OF GUNFLEET, Dr. CHRISTOPHER WREN, and Mr. HOOKE, examining it, had so good opinion of it, that they proposed it be shown to the King, and that a description and scheme of it should be sent to Mons. HUYGENS at Paris, thereby to secure this invention to Mr. NEWTON. The experiment of the opening of the thorax of a dog was suggested. Mr. HOOKE and Mr. WATERHOUSE having made this experiment formerly, begged to be excused for the duration of any such proceedings. Dr. BALLE and Dr. KING made the experiment but did not succeed. A fifth Cabal, perhaps, would be a Knot of Mathematicians, who would sit so long wrangling about squaring the Circle, till, with Drinking and Rattling, they were ready to let fall a nauseous Perpendicular from their Mouths to the Chamber-Pot. Another little Party would be deeply engaged in a learned Dispute about Transmutation of Metals, and contend so warmly about turning Lead into Gold, till the Bar had a just Claim to all the Silver in their Pockets . . . – NED WARD, The Vertuoso's Club AFEW OF THEM ENDED UP at a tavern, unfortunately called the Dogg, on Broad Street near London Wall. Wilkins (who was the Bishop of Chester now) and Sir Winston Churchill and Thomas More Anglesey, a.k.a. the Duke of Gunfleet, amused themselves using Newton's telescope to peer into the windows of the Navy Treasury across the way, where lamps were burning and clerks were working late. Wheelbarrows laden with lockboxes were coming up every few minutes from the goldsmiths' shops on Threadneedle. Hooke commandeered a small table, set his bubble-level upon it, and began to adjust it by inserting scraps of paper beneath its legs. Daniel quaffed bitters and thought that this was all a great improvement on this morning. 'To Oldenburg,' someone said, and even Hooke raised his head up on its bent neck and drank to the Secretary's health. 'Are we allowed to know why the King put him in the Tower?' asked Daniel. Hooke suddenly became absorbed in table-levelling, the others in viewing a planet that was rising over Bishopsgate, and Daniel reckoned that the reason for Oldenburg's imprisonment was one of those things that everyone in London should simply know, it was one of those facts Londoners breathed in like the smoke of sea-coal. John Wilkins brushed significantly past Daniel and stepped outside, plucking a pipe from a tobacco-box on the wall. Daniel joined him for a smoke on the street. It was a fine summer eve in Bishopsgate: on the far side of London Wall, lunaticks at Bedlam were carrying on vigorous disputes with angels, demons, or the spirits of departed relations, and on this side, the rhythmic yelping of a bone-saw came through a half-open window of Gresham's College as a cabal of Bishops, Knights, Doctors, and Colonels removed the rib-cage from a living mongrel. The Dogg's sign creaked above in a mild river-breeze. Coins clinked dimly inside the Navy's lockboxes as porters worried them up stairs. Through an open window they could occasionally glimpse Samuel Pepys, Fellow of the Royal Society, making arrangements with his staff and gazing out the window, longingly, at the Dogg. Daniel and the Bishop stood there and took it in for a minute as a sort of ritual, as Papists cross themselves when entering a church: to do proper respect to the place. 'Mr. Oldenburg is the heart of the R.S.,' Bishop Wilkins began. 'I would give that honor to you, or perhaps Mr. Hooke . . .' 'Hold – I was not finished – I was launching a metaphor. Please remember that I've been preaching to rapt congregations, or at least they are pretending to be rapt – in any case, they sit quietly while I develop my metaphors.' 'I beg forgiveness, and am now pretending to be rapt.' 'Very well. Now! As we have learned by doing appalling things to stray dogs, the heart accepts blood returning from organs, such as the brain, through veins, such as the jugular. It expels blood toward these organs through arteries, such as the carotid. Do you remember what happened when Mr. Hooke cross-plumbed the mastiff, and connected his jugular to his carotid? And don't tell me that the splice broke and sprayed blood all around – this I remember.' 'The blood settled into a condition of equilibrium, and began to coagulate in the tube.' 'And from this we concluded that – ?' 'I have long since forgotten. That bypassing the heart is a bad idea?' 'One might conclude,' said the Bishop helpfully, 'that an inert vessel, that merely accepts the circulating Fluid, but never expels it, becomes a stagnant back-water – or to put it otherwise, that the heart, by forcing it outwards, drives it around the cycle that in good time brings it back in from the organs and extremities. Hallo, Mr. Pepys!' (Shifting his focus to across the way.) 'Starting a war, are we?' 'Too easy . . . winding one up, my lord,' from the window. 'Is it going to be finished any time soon ? Your diligence is setting an example for all of us – stop it!' 'I detect the beginnings of a lull . . .' 'Now, Daniel, anyone who scans the History of the Royal Society can see that, at each meeting, Mr. Oldenburg reads several letters from Continental savants, such as Mr. Huygens, and, lately, Dr. Leibniz . . .' 'I'm not familiar with that name.' 'You will be – he is a mad letter-writer and a protégé of Huygens – a devotee of Pansophism – he has lately been smothering us with curious documents. You haven't heard about him because Mr. Oldenburg has been passing his missives round to Mr. Hooke, Mr. Boyle, Mr. Barrow, and others, trying to find someone who can even read them, as a first step towards determining whether or not they are nonsense. But I digress. For every letter Mr. Oldenburg reads , he receives a dozen – why so many?' 'Because, like a heart, he pumps so many outwards:?' 'Yes, precisely. Whole sacks of them crossing the Channel – driving the circulation that brings new ideas, from the Continent, back to our little meetings.' 'Damn me, and now the King's clapped him in the Tower!' said Daniel, unable to avoid feeling a touch melodramatic – this kind of dialog not being, exactly, his metier. 'Bypassing the heart,' said Wilkins, without a trace of any such self-consciousness. 'I can already feel the Royal Society coagulating. Thank you for bringing Mr. Newton's telescope. Fresh blood! When can we see him at a meeting?' 'Probably never, as long as the Fellows persist in cutting up dogs.' 'Ah – he's squeamish – abhors cruelty?' 'Cruelty to animals. ' 'Some Fellows have proposed that we borrow residents of . . .' said the Bishop, nodding towards Bedlam. 'Isaac might be more comfortable with that,' Daniel admitted. A barmaid had been hovering, and now stepped into the awkward silence: 'Mr. Hooke requests your presence.' 'Thank God,' Wilkins said to her, 'I was afraid you were going to complain he had committed an offense against your person.' The patrons of the Dogg were backed up against the walls in the configuration normally used for watching bar-fights, viz. forming an empty circle around Mr. Hooke's table, which was (as shown by the bubble instrument) now perfectly level. It was also clean, and empty except for a glob of quicksilver in the middle, with numerous pinhead-sized droplets scattered about in novel constellations. Mr. Hooke was peering at the large glob – a perfect, regular dome – through an optical device of his own manufacture. Glancing up, he twiddled a hog-bristle between thumb and index finger, pushing an invisibly tiny droplet of mercury across the table until it merged with the large one. Then more peering. Then, moving with the stealth of a cat-burglar, he backed away from the table. When he had put a good fathom between himself and the experiment, he looked up at Wilkins and said, 'Universal Measure!' 'What!? Sir! You don't say!' 'You will agree,' Hooke said, 'that level is an absolute concept – any sentient person can make a surface level.' 'It is in the Philosophical Language,' said Bishop Wilkins – this signified yes . Pepys came in the door, looking splendid, and had his mouth open to demand beer, when he realized a solemn ceremony was underway. 'Likewise mercury is the same in all places – in all worlds.' 'Agreed.' 'As is the number two.' 'Of course.' 'Here I have created a flat, clean, smooth, level surface. On it I have placed a drop of mercury and adjusted it so that the diameter is exactly two times its height. Anyone, anywhere could repeat these steps – the result would be a drop of mercury exactly the same size as this one. The diameter of the drop, then, can be used as the common unit of measurement for the Philosophical Language!' The sound of men thinking. Pepys: 'Then you could build a container that was a certain number of those units high, wide, and deep; fill it with water; and have a standard measure of weight.' 'Just so, Mr. Pepys.' 'From length and weight you could make a standard pendulum – the time of its alternations would provide a universal unit of time!' 'But water beads up differently on different surfaces,' said the Bishop of Chester. 'I assume the same sorts of variations occur with mercury.' Hooke, resentful: 'The surface to be used could be stipulated: copper, or glass . . .' 'If the force of gravity varies with altitude, how would that affect the height of the drop?' asked Daniel Waterhouse. 'Do it at sea-level,' said Hooke, with a dollop of spleen. 'Sea-level varies with the tides,' Pepys pointed out. 'What of other planets?' Wilkins demanded thunderously. 'Other planets !? We haven't finished with this one!' 'As our compatriot Mr. Oldenburg has said: ‘You will please to remember that we have taken to task the whole Universe, and that we were obliged to do so by the nature of our Design!' “ Hooke, very stormy-looking now, scraped most of the quicksilver into a funnel, and thence into a flask; departed; and was sighted by Mr. Pepys (peering through the Newtonian reflector) no more than a minute later, stalking off towards Hounsditch in the company of a whore. 'He's flown into one of his Fits of Melancholy – we won't see him for two weeks now – then we'll have to reprimand him,' Wilkins grumbled. Almost as if it were written down somewhere in the Universal Character, Pepys and Wilkins and Waterhouse somehow knew that they had unfinished business together – that they ought to be having a discreet chat about Mr. Oldenburg. A triangular commerce in highly significant glances and eyebrow-raisings flourished there in the Dogg, for the next hour, among them. But they could not all break free at once: Churchill and others wanted more details from Daniel about this Mr. Newton and his telescope. The Duke of Gunfleet got Pepys cornered, and interrogated him about dark matters concerning the Navy's finances. Blood-spattered, dejected Royal Society members stumbled in from Gresham's College, with the news that Drs. King and Belle had gotten lost in the wilderness of canine anatomy, the dog had died, and they really needed Hooke – where was he? Then they cornered Bishop Wilkins and talked Royal Society politics – would Comstock stand for election to President again? Would Anglesey arrange to have himself nominated? BUT LATER – too late for Daniel, who had risen early, when Isaac had – the three of them were together in Pepys's coach, going somewhere. 'I note my Lord Gunfleet has taken up a sudden interest in Naval -gazing,' said Wilkins. 'As our safety from the Dutch depends upon our Navy,' Pepys said carefully, 'and most of our Navy is arrayed before the Casbah in Algiers, many Persons of Quality share Anglesey's curiosity.' Wilkins only looked amused. 'I did not hear him asking you of frigates and cannons,' he said, 'but of Bills of Exchange, and pay-coupons.' Pepys cleared his throat at length, and glanced nervously at Daniel. 'Those who are responsible for draining the Navy's coffers, must answer to those who are responsible for filling them,' he finally said. Even Daniel, a dull Cambridge scholar, had the wit to know that the coffer-drainer being referred to here was the armaments-maker John Comstock, Earl of Epsom – and that the coffer-filler was Thomas More Anglesey, Duke of Gunfleet, and father of Louis Anglesey, the Earl of Upnor. 'Thus C and A,' Wilkins said. 'What does the Cabal's second syllable have to say of Naval matters?' 'No surprises from Bolstrood*of course.' 'Some say Bolstrood wants our Navy in Africa, so that the Dutch can invade us, and make of us a Calvinist nation.' 'Given that the V.O.C.*is paying out dividends of forty percent, I think that there are many new Calvinists on Threadneedle Street.' 'Is Apthorp one of them?' 'Those rumors are nonsense – Apthorp would rather build his East India Company, than invest in the Dutch one.' 'So it follows that Apthorp wants a strong Navy, to protect our merchant ships from those Dutch East Indiamen, so topheavy with cannons.' 'Yes.' 'What of General Lewis?' 'Let's ask the young scholar,' Pepys said mischievously. Daniel was dumbstruck for a few moments – to the gurgling, boyish amusement of Pepys and Wilkins. The telescope seemed to be watching Daniel, too: it sat in its box across from him, a disembodied sensory organ belonging to Isaac Newton, staring at him with more than human acuteness. He heard Isaac demanding to know what on earth he, Daniel Waterhouse, could possibly be doing, riding across London in Samuel Pepys's coach – pretending to be a man of affairs! 'Err . . . a weak Navy forces us to keep a strong Army, to fight off any Dutch invasions,' Daniel said, thinking aloud. 'But with a strong Navy, we can invade the Hollanders!' Wilkins protested. 'More glory for General Lewis, Duke of Tweed!' 'Not without French help,' Daniel said, after a few moments' consideration, 'and my lord Tweed is too much the Presbyterian.' 'Is this the same good Presbyterian who enjoyed a secret earldom at the exile court at St. Germaines, when Cromwell ruled the land?' 'He is a Royalist, that's all,' Daniel demurred. What was he doing in this carriage having this conversation, besides going out on a limb, and making a fool of himself? The real answer was known only to John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester, Author of both the Cryptonomicon and the Philosophical Language, who encrypted with his left hand and made things known to all possible worlds with his right. Who'd gotten Daniel into Trinity College – invited him out to Epsom during the Plague – nominated him for the Royal Society – and now, it seemed, had something else in mind for him. Was Daniel here as an apprentice, sitting at the master's knee? It was shockingly prideful, and radically non-Puritan, for him to think so – but he could come up with no other hypothesis. 'Right, then, it all has to do with Mr. Oldenburg's letters abroad . . .' Pepys said, when some change in the baroscopic pressure (or something) signified it was time to drop pretenses and talk seriously. Wilkins: 'I assumed that.Which one ?' 'Does it matter? All of the GRUBENDOL letters are intercepted and read before he even sees them.' 'I've always wondered who does the reading,' Wilkins reflected. 'He must be very bright, or else perpetually confused.' 'Likewise, all of Oldenburg's outgoing mail is examined – you knew this.' 'And in some letter, he said something indiscreet – ?' 'It is simply that the sheer volume of his foreign correspondence – taken together with the fact that he's from Germany – andthat he's worked as a diplomat on the Continent – and that he's a friend of Cromwell's Puritanickal poet – ' 'John Milton.' 'Yes . . . finally, consider that no one at court understands even a tenth of what he's saying in his letters – it makes a certain type of person nervous.' 'Are you saying he was thrown into the Tower of London on general principles ?' 'As a precaution, yes.' 'What – does that mean he has to stay in there for the rest of his life ?' 'Of course not . . . only until certain very tender negotiations are finished.' 'Tender negotiations . . .' Wilkins repeated a few times, as if further information could thus be pounded out of the dry and pithy words. And here the discourse, which, to Daniel, had been merely confusing up to this point, plunged into obscurity perfect and absolute. 'I didn't know he had a tender bone in his body . . . oh, wipe that smirk off your face, Mr. Pepys, I meant nothing of the sort!' 'Oh, it is known that his feelings for sa soeur are most affectionate. He's writing letters to her all the time lately.' 'Does she write back?' 'Minette spews out letters like a diplomat. ' 'Keeping his hisness well acquainted – I am guessing – with all that is new with her beloved?' 'The volume of correspondence is such,' Pepys exclaimed, 'that His Majesty can never have been so close to the man you refer to as he is today. Hoops of gold are stronger than bands of steel.' Wilkins, starting to look a bit queasy: 'Hmmm . . . a good thing, then, isn't it, that formal contacts are being made through those two arch-Protestants – ' 'I would refer you to Chapter Ten of your 1641 work,' said Pepys. House of Bourbon 'Er . . . stupid me . . . I've lost you . . . we're speaking now of Oldenburg?' 'I intended no change in subject – we're still on Treaties.' The coach stopped. Pepys climbed out of it. Daniel listened to the whack, whack, whack of his slap-soled boots receding across cobblestones. Wilkins was staring at nothing, trying to decrypt whatever Pepys had said. Riding in a carriage through London was only a little better than being systematically beaten by men with cudgels – Daniel felt the need for a stretch, and so he climbed out, too, turned round – and found himself looking straight down a lane toward the front of St. James's Palace, a few hundred yards distant. Spinning round a hundred and eighty degrees, he discovered Comstock House, a stupefying Gothick pile heaving itself up out of some gardens and pavements. Pepys's carriage had turned in off of Piccadilly and stopped in the great house's forecourt. Daniel admired its situation: John Comstock could, if he so chose, plant himself in the center of his front doorway and fire a musket across his garden, out his front gate, across Piccadilly, straight down the center of a tree-lined faux -country lane, across Pall Mall, and straight into the grand entrance of St. James's, where it would be likely to kill someone very well-dressed. Stone walls, hedges, and wrought-iron fences had been cunningly arranged so as to crop away the view of Piccadilly and neighboring houses, and enhance the impression that Comstock House and St. James's Palace were all part of the same family compound. Daniel edged out through Comstock's front gates and stood at the margin of Piccadilly, facing south towards St. James's. He could see a gentleman with a bag entering the Palace – probably a doctor coming to bleed a few pints from Anne Hyde's jugular. Off to his left, in the general direction of the river, was an open space – a vast construction site, now – about a quarter of a mile on a side, with Charing Cross on the opposite corner. Since it was night, and no workers were around, it seemed as if stone foundations and walls were growing up out of the ground through some process of spontaneous generation, like toadstools bursting from soil in the middle of the night. From here, it was possible to see Comstock House in perspective: it was really just one of several noble houses lined up along Piccadilly, facing towards St. James's Palace, like soldiers drawn up for review. Berkeley House, Burlington House, and Gunfleet House were some of the others. But only Comstock House had that direct Palace view down the lane. He felt a giant door grinding open, and heard dignified murmurings, and saw that John Comstock had emerged from his house, arm in arm with Pepys. He was sixty-three years old, and Daniel thought that he was leaning on Pepys, just a bit, for support. But he had been wounded in battles more than once, so it didn't necessarily mean he was getting feeble. Daniel sprang to the carriage and got Isaac's telescope out of there and had the driver stow it securely on the roof. Then he joined the other three inside, and the carriage wheeled round and clattered out across Piccadilly and down the lane toward St. James's. John Comstock, Earl of Epsom, President of the Royal Society, and advisor to the King on all matters Natural-Philosophic, was dressed in a Persian vest – a heavy coatlike garment that, along with the Cravate, was the very latest at Court. Pepys was attired the same way, Wilkins was in completely out-moded clothing, Daniel as usual was dressed as a penniless itinerant Puritan from twenty years ago. Not that anyone was looking at him. 'Working late hours?' Comstock asked Pepys, apparently reading some clue in his attire. 'The Pay Office has been extraordinarily busy,' Pepys said. 'The King has been preoccupied with concerns of money – until recently,' Comstock said. ' Nowhe is eager to turn his attentions back to his first love – natural philosophy.' 'Then we have something that will delight him – a new Telescope,' Wilkins began. But telescopes were not on Comstock's agenda, and so he ignored the digression, and continued: 'His Majesty has asked me to arrange a convocation at Whitehall Palace tomorrow evening. The Duke of Gunfleet, the Bishop of Chester, Sir Winston Churchill, you, Mr. Pepys, and I are invited to join the King for a demonstration at Whitehall: Enoch the Red will show us Phosphorus .' Just short of St. James's Palace, the carriage turned left onto Pall Mall, and began to move up in the direction of Charing Cross. 'Light-bearer? What's that?' Pepys asked. 'A new elemental substance,' Wilkins said. 'All the alchemists on the Continent are abuzz over it.' 'What's it made of?' 'It's not made of anything:that's what is meant by elemental !' 'What planet is it of? I thought all the planets were spoken for,' Pepys protested. 'Enoch will explain it.' 'Has there been any movement on the Royal Society's other concern?' 'Yes!' Comstock said. He was looking into Wilkins's eyes, but he made a tiny glance toward Daniel. Wilkins replied with an equally tiny nod. 'Mr. Waterhouse, I am pleased to present you with this order,' Comstock said, 'from my Lord Penistone,'*producing a terrifying document with a fat wax seal dangling from the bottom margin. 'Show it to the guards at the Tower tomorrow evening – and, even as we are at one end of London, viewing the Phosphorus Demo', you and Mr. Oldenburg will be convened at the other so that you can see to his needs. I know that he wants new strings for his theorbo – quills – ink – certain books – and of course there's an enormous amount of unread mail.' 'Unread by GRUBENDOL, that is,' Pepys jested. Comstock turned and gave him a look that must've made Pepys feel as if he were staring directly into the barrel of a loaded cannon. Daniel Waterhouse exchanged a little glance with the Bishop of Chester. Now they knew who'd been reading Oldenburg's foreign letters: Comstock. Comstock turned and smiled politely – but not pleasantly – at Daniel. 'You're staying at your elder half-brother's house?' 'Just so, sir.' 'I'll have the goods sent round tomorrow morning.' The coach swung round the southern boundary of Charing Cross and pulled up before a fine new town-house. Daniel, having evidently out-stayed his relevance, was invited in the most polite and genteel way imaginable to exit the coach, and take a seat on top of it. He did so and realized, without really being surprised, that they had stopped in front of the apothecary shop of Monsieur LeFebure, King's Chymist – the very same place where Isaac Newton had spent most of the morning, and had had an orchestrated chance encounter with the Earl of Upnor. The front door opened and a man in a long cloak stepped out, silhouetted by lamplight from within, and approached the coach. As he got clear of the light shining out of the house, and moved across the darkness, it became possible to see that the hem of his cloak, and the tips of his fingers, shone with a strange green light. 'Well met, Daniel Waterhouse,' he said, and before Daniel could answer, Enoch the Red had climbed into the open door of the coach and closed it behind him. The coach simply rounded the corner out of Charing Cross, which put them at one end of the long paved plaza before Whitehall. They drove directly towards the Holbein Gate, which was a four-turreted Gothic castle, taller than it was wide, that dominated the far end of the space. A huddle of indifferent gables and chimneys hid the big spaces off to their left: first Scotland Yard, which was an irregular mosaic of Wood Yards and Scalding Yards and Cider Houses, cluttered with coal-heaps and wood-piles, and after that, the Great Court of the Palace. On the right – where, during Daniel's boyhood, there'd been nothing but park, and a view towards St. James's Palace – there now loomed a long stone wall, twice as high as a man, and blank except for the gun-slits. Because Daniel was up on top of the carriage he could see a few tree-branches over its top, and the rooves of the wooden buildings that Cromwell had thrown up within those walls to house his Horse Guards. The new King – perhaps remembering that this plaza had once been filled with a crowd of people come to watch his father's head get chopped off – had decided to keep the wall, and the gun-slits, and the Horse Guards. The Palace's Great Gate went by on the left, opening a glimpse of the Great Court and one or two big halls and chapels at the far end of it, down towards the river. More or less well-dressed pedestrians were going in and out of that gate, in twos and threes, availing themselves of a public right-of-way that led across the Great Court (it was clearly visible, even at night, as a rutted path over the ground) and that eventually snaked between, and through, various Palace Buildings and terminated at Whitehall Stairs, where watermen brought their little boats to pick up and discharge passengers. The view through the Great Gate was then eclipsed by the corner of the Banqueting House, a giant white stone snuff-box of a building, which was kept dark on most nights so that torch- and candle-smoke would not blacken the buxom goddesses that Rubens had daubed on its ceiling. One or two torches were burning in there tonight, and Daniel was able to look up through a window and catch a glimpse of Minerva strangling Rebellion. But the carriage had nearly reached the end of the plaza now, and was slowing down, for this was an aesthetic cul-de-sac so miserable that it made even horses a bit woozy: the old quasi-Dutch gables of Lady Castlemaine's apartments dead ahead; the Holbein Gate's squat Gothic arch to the right and its medieval castle-towers looming far above their heads; the Italian Renaissance Banqueting House still on their left; and, across from it, that blank, slitted stone wall, which was as close as Puritans had ever come to having their own style of architecture. The Holbein Gate would lead to King Street, which would take them to a sort of pied-à-terre that Pepys had in that quarter. But instead the driver chivvied his team around a difficult left turn and into a dark downhill passage, barely wider than the coach itself, that cut behind the Banqueting House and drained toward the river. Now, any Englishman in decent clothing could walk almost anywhere in Whitehall Palace, even passing through the King's ante-chamber – a practice that European nobility considered to be far beyond vulgar, deep into the realm of the bizarre. Even so, Daniel had never been down this defile, which had always seemed Not a Good Place for a Young Puritan to Go – he wasn't even sure if it had an outlet, and always imagined that people like the Earl of Upnor would go there to molest serving-wenches or prosecute sword-duels. The Privy Gallery ran along the right side of it. Now technically a gallery was just a hallway – in this case, one that led directly to those parts of Whitehall where the King himself dwelt, and toyed with his mistresses, and met with his counselors. But just as London Bridge had, over time, become covered over with houses and shops of haberdashers and glovers and drapers and publicans, so the Privy Gallery, tho' still an empty tube of air, had become surrounded by a jumbled encrustation of old buildings – mostly apartments that the King awarded to whichever courtiers and mistresses were currently in his favor. These coalesced into a bulwark of shadow off to Daniel's right, and seemed much bigger than they really were because of being numerous and confusing – as the corpse of a frog, which can fit into a pocket, seems to be a mile wide to the young Natural Philosopher who attempts to dissect it, and inventory its several parts. Daniel was ambushed, several times, by explosions of laughter from candle-lit windows above: it sounded like sophisticated and cruel laughter. The passage finally bent round to the point where he could see its end. Apparently it debouched into a small pebbled court that he knew by reputation: the King, in theory, listened to sermons from the windows of various chambers and drawing-rooms that fronted on it. But before they reached that holy place the driver reined in his team and the carriage stopped. Daniel looked about, wondering why, and saw nothing except for a stone stairway that descended into a vault or tunnel beneath the Privy Gallery. Pepys, Comstock, the Bishop of Chester, and Enoch the Red climbed out. Down in the tunnel, lights were now being lit. Consequently, through an open window, Daniel could see a banquet laid: a leg of mutton, a wheel of Cheshire, a dish of larks, ale, China oranges. But this room was not a dining-hall. In its corners he could see the gleam of retorts and quicksilver-flasks and fine balances, the glow of furnaces. He had heard rumors that the King had caused an alchemical laboratory to be built in the bowels of Whitehall, but until now, they had only been rumors. 'My coachman will take you back to Mr. Raleigh Waterhouse's residence,' Pepys told him, pausing at the lip of the stairway. 'Please make yourself comfortable below.' 'You are very kind, sir, but I'm not far from Raleigh's, and I could benefit from the walk.' 'As you wish. Please give my compliments to Mr. Oldenburg when you see him.' 'I shall be honored to do so,' Daniel answered, and just restrained himself from saying, Please give mine to the King! Daniel now worked up his courage and walked down into the Sermon Court and gazed up into the windows of the King's chambers, though not for long – he was trying to look as if he came here all the time. A little side passage, under the end of the Privy Gallery, got him into the corner of the Privy Garden, which was a vast space. Another gallery ran along its edge, parallel to the river, and by going down it he could have got all the way to the royal bowling green and thence down into Westminster. But he'd had enough excitement for just now – instead he cut back across the great Garden, heading towards the Holbein Gate. Courtiers strolled and gossiped all round. Every so often he turned around and gazed back towards the river to admire the lodgings of the King and the Queen and their household rising up above the garden with the golden light of many beeswax candles shining out of them. If Daniel had truly been the man about town that, for a few minutes, he was pretending to be, he'd have had eyes only for the people in the windows and on the garden paths. He'd have strained to glimpse something – a new trend in the cut of Persian vests, or two important Someones exchanging whispers in a shadowed corner. But as it was, there was one spectacle, and one only, that drew his gaze, like Polaris sucking on a lodestone. He turned his back on the King's dwellings and looked south across the garden and the bowling green towards Westminster. There, mounted up high on a weatherbeaten stick, was a sort of irregular knot of stuff, barely visible as a gray speck in the moonlight: the head of Oliver Cromwell. When the King had come back, ten years ago, he'd ordered the corpse to be dug up from where Drake and the others had buried it, and the head cut off and mounted on a pike and never taken down. Ever since then Cromwell had been looking down helplessly upon a scene of unbridled lewdness that was Whitehall Palace. And now Cromwell, who had once dandled Drake's youngest son on his knee, was looking down upon him. Daniel tilted his head back and looked up at the stars and supposed that seen from Drake's perspective up in Heaven it must all look like Hell – and Daniel right in the middle of it. BEING LOCKED UP in the Tower of London had changed Henry Oldenburg's priorities all around. Daniel had expected that the Secretary of the Royal Society would jump headfirst into the great sack of foreign mail that Daniel had brought him, but all he cared about was the new lute-strings. He'd grown too fat to move around very effectively and so Daniel fetched necessaries from various parts of the half-moon-shaped room: Oldenburg's lute, extra candles, a tuning-fork, some sheet-music, more wood on the fire. Oldenburg turned the lute over across his knees like a naughty boy for spanking, and tied a piece of gut or two around the instrument's neck to serve as frets (the old ones being worn through), then replaced a couple of broken strings. Half an hour of tuning ensued (the new strings kept stretching) and then, finally, Oldenburg got what he really ached for: he and Daniel, sitting face to face in the middle of the room, sang a two-part song, the parts cleverly written so that their voices occasionally joined in chords that resonated sweetly: the curving wall of the cell acting like the mirror of Newton's telescope to reflect the sound back to them. After a few verses, Daniel had his part memorized, and so when he sang the chorus he sat up straight and raised his chin and sang loudly at those walls, and read the graffiti cut into the stone by prisoners of centuries past. Not your vulgar Newgate Prison graffiti – most of it was in Latin, big and solemn as gravestones, and there were astrological diagrams and runic incantations graven by imprisoned sorcerers. Then some ale to cool the wind-pipes, and a venison pie and a keg of oysters and some oranges contributed by the R.S., and Oldenburg did a quick sort of the mail – one pile containing the latest doings of the Hotel Montmor salon in Paris, a couple of letters from Huygens, a short manuscript from Spinoza, a large pile of ravings sent in by miscellaneous cranks, and a Leibniz-mound. 'This damned German will never shut up!' Oldenburg grunted – which, since Oldenburg was himself a notoriously prolix German, was actually a jest at his own expense. 'Let me see . . . Leibniz proposes to found a Societas Eruditorum that will gather in young Vagabonds and raise them up to be an army of Natural Philosophers to overawe the Jesuits . . . here are his thoughts on free will versus predestination . . . it would be great sport to get him in an argument with Spinoza . . . he asks me here whether I'm aware Comenius has died . . . says he's ready to pick up the faltering torch of Pansophism*. . . . here's a light, easy-to-read analysis of how the bad Latin used by Continental scholars leads to faulty thinking, and in turn to religious schism, war, bad philosophy . . .' 'Sounds like Wilkins.' 'Wilkins! Yes! I've considered decorating these walls with some graffiti of my own, and writing it in the Universal Character . . . but it's too depressing. ‘Look, we have invented a new Philosophickal Language so that when we are imprisoned by Kings we can scratch a higher form of graffiti on our cell walls.' “ 'Perhaps it'll lead us to a world where Kings can't, or won't, imprison us at all – ' 'Now you sound like Leibniz. Ah, here are some new mathematical proofs . . . nothing that hasn't been proved already, by Englishmen . . . but Leibniz's proofs are more elegant . . . here's something he has modestly entitled Hypothesis Physica Nova.Good thing I'm in the Tower, or I'd never have time to read all this.' Daniel made coffee over the fire – they drank it and smoked Virginia tobacco in clay-pipes. Then it was time for Oldenburg's evening constitutional. He preceded Daniel down a stack of stone pie-wedges that formed a spiral stair. 'I'd hold the door and say ‘after you,' but suppose I fell – you'd end up in the basement of Broad Arrow Tower crushed beneath me – and I'd be in the pink.' 'Anything for the Royal Society,' Daniel jested, marveling at how Oldenburg's bulk filled the helical tube of still air. 'Oh, you're more valuable to them than I am,' Oldenburg said. 'Poh!' 'I am near the end of my usefulness. You are just beginning. They have great plans for you – ' 'Until yesterday I wouldn't've believed you – then I was allowed to hear a conversation – perfectly incomprehensible to me – but it sounded frightfully important.' 'Tell me about this conversation.' They came out onto the top of the old stone curtain-wall that joined Broad Arrow Tower to Salt Tower on the south. Arm in arm, they strolled along the battlements. To the left they could look across the moat – an artificial oxbow-lake that communicated with the Thames – and a defensive glacis beyond that, then a few barracks and warehouses having to do with the Navy, and then the pasture-grounds of Wapping crooked in an elbow of the Thames, dim lights out at Ratcliff and Limehouse – then a blackness containing, among other things, Europe. 'The Dramatis Personae: John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester, and Mr. Samuel Pepys Esquire, Admiral's Secretary, Treasurer of the Fleet, Clerk of Acts of the Navy Board, deputy Clerk of the Privy Seal, Member of the Fishery Corporation, Treasurer of the Tangier Committee, right-hand-man of the Earl of Sandwich, courtier . . . am I leaving anything out?' 'Fellow of the Royal Society.' 'Oh, yes . . . thank you.' 'What said they?' 'First a brief speculation about who was reading your mail . . .' 'I assume it's John Comstock. He spied for the King during the Interregnum, why can't he spy for the King now?' 'Rings true . . . this led to some double entendres about tender negotiations. Mr. Pepys volunteered – speaking of the King of England, here – ‘his feelings for sa soeur are most affectionate, he's writing many letters to her.' “ 'Well, you know that Minette is in France – ' 'Minette?' 'That is what King Charles calls Henrietta Anne, his sister,' Oldenburg explained. 'I don't recommend using that name in polite society – unless you want to move in with me.' 'She's the one who's married to the Duc d'Orléans* – ?' 'Yes, and Mr. Pepys's lapsing into French was of course a way of emphasizing this. Pray continue.' 'My Lord Wilkins wondered whether she wrote back, and Pepys said Minette was spewing out letters like a diplomat .' Oldenburg cringed, and shook his head in dismay. 'Very crude work on Mr. Pepys's part. He was letting it be known that this exchange of letters was some sort of diplomatic negotiation. But he did not need to be so coarse with Wilkins . . . he must have been tired, distracted . . .' 'He'd been working late – lots of gold going into the Navy Treasury under cover of darkness.' 'I know it – behold!' Oldenburg said, and, tightening his arm, swung Daniel round so that both of them were looking west, across the Inmost Ward. They were near Salt Tower, which was the southeastern corner of the squarish Tower complex. The southern wall, therefore, stretched away from them, paralleling the river, connecting a row of squat round towers. Off to their right, planted in the center of the ward, was the ancient donjon: a freestanding building called the White Tower. A few low walls partitioned the ward into smaller quadrangles, but from this viewpoint the most conspicuous structure was the great western wall, built strong to resist attack from the always difficult City of London. On the far side of that wall, hidden from their view, a street ran up a narrow defile between it and a somewhat lower outer wall. Stout piles of smoke and steam were building from that street – which was lined with works for melting and working precious metals. It was called Mint Street. 'Their infernal hammers keep me awake – the smoke of their furnaces comes in through the embrasures.' Walls hereabouts tended to have narrow cross-shaped arrow-slits called embrasures, which was one of the reasons the Tower made a good prison, especially for fat men. 'So that's why kings live at Whitehall nowadays – to be upwind of the Mint?' Daniel said jestingly. On Oldenburg's face, perfunctory amusement stamped out by pedantic annoyance. 'You don't understand. The Mint's operations are extremely sporadic – it has been cold and silent for months – the workers idle and drunk.' 'And now?' 'Now they are busy and drunk. A few days ago, as I stood in this very place, I saw a three-master, a man of war, heavily laden, drop anchor just around the river-bend, there. Small boats carrying heavy loads began to put in at the water-gate just there, in the middle of the south wall. On the same night, the Mint came suddenly to life, and has not slept since.' 'And gold began to arrive at the Navy Treasury,' Daniel said, 'making much work for Mr. Pepys.' 'Now, let us get back to this conversation you were allowed to hear. How did the Bishop of Chester respond to Mr. Pepys's rather ham-handed revelations?' 'He said something like, ‘So Minette keeps his Majesty well acquainted with the doings of her beau?'' 'Now whom do you suppose he meant by that?' 'Her husband – ? I know, I know – my naïveté is pathetic.' 'Philippe, duc d'Orleans, owns the largest and finest collection of women's underwear in France – his sexual adventures are strictly limited to being fucked up the ass by strapping officers.' 'Poor Minette!' 'She knew perfectly well when she married him,' Oldenburg said, rolling his eyes. 'She spent her honeymoon in bed with her new husband's elder brother: King Louis XIV. That is what Bishop Wilkins meant when he referred to Minette's beau .' 'I stand corrected.' 'Pray go on.' 'Pepys assured Wilkins that, considering the volume of correspondence, King Charles couldn't help but be very close to the man in question – an analogy was made to hoops of gold . . .' 'Which you took to mean, matrimonial bliss?' 'Even I knew what Pepys meant by that, ' Daniel said hotly. 'So did Wilkins, I'm sure – how did he seem, then?' 'Ill at ease – he wanted reassurance that ‘the two arch-Dissenters' were handling formal contacts.' 'It is a secret – but generally known among the sort who rattle around London in private coaches in the night-time – that a treaty with France is being negotiated by the Earl of Shaftesbury, and His Majesty's old drinking and whoring comrade, the Duke of Buckingham. Chosen for the job not because they are skilled diplomats but because not even your late father would ever accuse them of Popish sympathies.' A Yeoman Warder was approaching, making his rounds. 'Good evening, Mr. Oldenburg. Mr. Waterhouse.' 'Evening, George. How's the gout?' 'Better today, thank you, sir – the cataplasm seemed to work – where did you get the receipt from?' George then went into a rote exchange of code-words with another Beefeater on the roof of Salt Tower, then reversed direction, bade them good evening, and strolled away. Daniel enjoyed the view until he was certain that the only creature that could overhear them was a spaniel-sized raven perched on a nearby battlement. Half a mile upstream, the river was combed, and nearly dammed up, by a line of sloppy, boat-shaped, man-made islands, supporting a series of short and none too ambitious stone arches. The arches were joined, one to the next, by a roadway, made of wood in some places and of stone in others, and the roadway was mostly covered with buildings that sprayed in every direction, cantilevered far out over the water and kept from falling into it by makeshift diagonal braces. Far upstream, and far downstream, the river was placid and sluggish, but where it was forced between those starlings (as the man-made islands were called), it was all furious. The starlings themselves, and the banks of the Thames for miles downstream, were littered with wreckage of light boats that had failed in the attempt to shoot the rapids beneath London Bridge, and (once a week or so) with the corpses and personal effects of their passengers. A few parts of the bridge had been kept free of buildings so that fires could not jump the river. In one of those gaps a burly woman stopped to fling a jar into the angry water below. Daniel could not see it from here, but he knew it would be painted with a childish rendering of a face: this a charm to ward off witch-spells. The water-wheels constructed in some of those arch-ways made gnashing and clanking noises that forced Waterhouse and Oldenburg, half a mile away, to raise their voices slightly, and put their heads closer together. Daniel supposed this was no accident – he suspected they were coming to a part of the conversation that Oldenburg would rather keep private from those sharp-eared Beefeaters. Directly behind London Bridge, but much farther away round the river-bend, were the lights of Whitehall Palace, and Daniel almost convinced himself that there was a greenish glow about the place tonight, as Enoch the Red schooled the King, and his court, and the most senior Fellows of the Royal Society, in the new Element called Phosphorus. 'Then Pepys got too enigmatic even for Wilkins,' Daniel said. 'He said, ‘I refer you to Chapter Ten of your 1641 work.'' 'The Cryptonomicon? ' 'So I assume. Chapter Ten is where Wilkins explains steganography, or how to embed a subliminal message in an innocuous-seeming letter – ' but here Daniel stopped because Oldenburg had adopted a patently fake look of innocent curiosity. 'I think you know this well enough. Now, Wilkins apologized for being thick-headed and asked whether Pepys was speaking, now, of you .' 'Ho, ho, ho!' Oldenburg bellowed, the laughter bouncing like cannon-fire off the hard walls of the Inmost Ward. The raven hopped closer to them and screeched, “Caa, caa, caa!' Both humans laughed, and Oldenburg fetched a bit of bread from his pocket and held it out to the bird. It hopped closer and reared back to peck it out of the fat pale hand – but Oldenburg snatched it back and said very distinctly, 'Cryptonomicon.' The raven cocked its head, opened its beak, and made a long gagging noise. Oldenburg sighed and opened his hand. 'I have been trying to teach him words,' he explained, 'but that one is too much of a mouthful, for a raven.' The bird's beak struck the bread out of Oldenburg's hand, and it hopped back out of reach, in case Oldenburg should change his mind. 'Wilkins's confusion is understandable – but Pepys's meaning is clear. There are some suspicious-minded persons upriver' (waving in the general direction of Whitehall) 'who think I'm a spy, communicating with Continental powers by means of subliminal messages embedded in what purport to be philosophickal discourses – it being beyond their comprehension that anyone would care as much as I seem to about new species of eels, methods for squaring hyperbolae, et cetera.But Pepys was not referring to that – he was being ever so much more clever. He was telling Wilkins that the not-very-secret negotiations being carried on by Buckingham and Shaftesbury are like the innocuous-seeming message, being used to conceal the truly secret agreement that the two Kings are drawing up, using Minette as the conduit.' 'God in Heaven,' Daniel said, and felt obliged to lean back against a battlement so that his spinning head wouldn't whirl him off into the moat. 'An agreement whose details we can only guess at – except for this: it causes gold to appear there in the middle of the night.' Oldenburg pointed to the Tower's water-gate along the Thames. Discretion kept him from speaking its ancient name: Traitor's Gate. 'Pepys mentioned in passing that Thomas More Anglesey was responsible for filling the Navy's coffers . . . I didn't understand what he meant.' 'Our Duke of Gunfleet has much warmer connections with France than anyone appreciates,' Oldenburg said – but then refused to say any more. And because silver and gold have their value from the matter itself; they have first this privilege, that the value of them cannot be altered by the power of one, nor of a few commonwealths; as being a common measure of the commodities of all places. But base money, may easily be enhanced, or abased. – HOBBES, Leviathan OLDENBURG GENTEELLY KICKED him out not much later, eager to get into that pile of mail. Under the politely curious gaze of the Beefeaters and their semi-tame ravens, Daniel walked down Water Lane, on the southern verge of the Tower complex. He walked past a large rectangular tower planted in the outer wall, above the river, and realized too late that if he'd only turned his head and glanced to the left at that point, he could've looked through the giant arch of Traitor's Gate and out across the river. Too late now – seemed a poor idea to go back. Probably just as well he hadn't gawked – then whoever was watching him would suspect that Oldenburg had mentioned it. Was he thinking like a courtier now? The massive octagonal pile of Bell Tower was on his right. As he got past it he dared to look up a narrow buffer between two layers of curtain-walls no more than fifty feet apart. Half of that width was filled up by the Mint's indifferent low houses and workshops. Daniel glimpsed furnace-light radiating from windows, warming high stone walls, making silhouettes of a congestion of carts bringing coal to burn. Men with muskets gazed coolly back at him. Mint workers crossed from building to building in the shambling gait of the exhausted. Then he was underneath the great arch of the Byward Tower, an elevated building thrown over Water Lane to control the Tower's land approach. A raven perched on a gargoyle and screeched 'Cromwell!' at him as he passed through onto the drawbridge that ran from Byward Tower out to Middle Tower, over the moat. Middle Tower gave way to Lion Tower – but the King's menagerie were all asleep and he did not hear the lions roar. From there he crossed over a last little backwater of the moat, over another drawbridge, and came into a little walled-in yard called the Bulwark – finally, then, through one last gate and into the world, though he had a lonely stroll over an empty moonlit glacis, past a few scavenging rats and copulating dogs, before he was among buildings and people. But then Daniel Waterhouse was right in the City of London – slightly confused, as some of the streets had been straightened and simplifed after the Fire. He pulled a fat gold egg from his pocket – one of Hooke's experimental watches, a failed stab at the Longitude Problem, adequate only for landlubbers. It told him that the Phosphorus Demo' was not quite finished at Whitehall, but that it was not too late to call on his in-laws. Daniel did not especially like to just call on people – seemed presumptuous to think they'd want to open the door and see him – but he knew that this was how men like Pepys got to become men like Pepys. So to the house of Ham. Lights burned expensively, and a coach and pair dawdled out front. Daniel was startled to discover his own family coat of arms (a castle bestriding a river) painted on the door of this coach. The house was smoking like a heavy forge – it was equipped with oversized chimneys, projecting tubes of orange light into their own smoke. As Daniel ascended the front steps he heard singing, which faltered but did not stop when he knocked: a very current melody making fun of the Dutch for being so bright, hard-working, and successful. Viscount Walbrook's*butler opened the door and recognized Daniel as a social caller – not, as sometimes happened, a nocturnal customer brandishing a goldsmith's note. Mayflower Ham, neé Waterhouse – tubby, fair, almost fifty, looking more like thirty – gave him a hug that pulled him up on tiptoe. Menopause had finally terminated her fantastically involved and complex relationship with her womb: a legendary saga of irregular bleeding, eleven-month pregnancies straight out of the Royal Society proceedings, terrifying primal omens, miscarriages, heartbreaking epochs of barrenness punctuated by phases of such explosive fertility that Uncle Thomas had been afraid to come near her – disturbing asymmetries, prolapses, relapses, and just plain lapses, hellish cramping fits, mysterious interactions with the Moon and other cœlestial phenomena, shocking imbalances of all four of the humours known to Medicine plus a few known only to Mayflower, seismic rumblings audible from adjoining rooms – cancers reabsorbed – (incredibly) three successful pregnancies culminating in four-day labors that snapped stout bedframes like kindling, vibrated pictures off walls, and sent queues of vicars, midwives, physicians, and family members down into their own beds, ruined with exhaustion. Mayflower had (fortunately for her!) been born with that ability, peculiar to certain women, of being able to talk about her womb in any company without it seeming inappropriate, and not only that but you never knew where in a conversation, or a letter, she would launch into it, plunging everyone into a clammy sweat as her descriptions and revelations forced them to consider topics so primal that they were beyond eschatology – even Drake had had to shut up about the Apocalypse when Mayflower had gotten rolling. Butlers fled and serving-maids fainted. The condition of Mayflower's womb affected the moods of England as the Moon ruled the tides. 'How, er . . . are you ?' Daniel inquired, bracing himself, but she just smiled sweetly, made rote apologies about the house not being finished (but no fashionable house ever was finished), and led him to the Dining-Room, where Uncle Thomas was entertaining Sterling and Beatrice Waterhouse, and Sir Richard Apthorp and his wife. The Apthorps had a goldsmith's shop of their own, and lived a few doors up Threadneedle. The attire was not so aggressively fine, Daniel not so monstrously out of place, as at the coffee-house. Sterling greeted him warmly, as if saying, Sorry old chap but the other day was business. They appeared to be celebrating something. Reference was made to all the work that lay ahead, so Daniel assumed it was some milestone in their grand shop-house-project. He wanted someone to ask him where he'd been, so that he could offhandedly let them know he'd been to the Tower waving around a warrant from the Secretary of State. But no one asked. After a while he realized that they probably would not care if they did know. The back door, fronting on Cornhill, kept creaking open, then booming shut. Finally, Daniel caught Uncle Thomas's eye, and, with a look, inquired what on earth was happening back there. A few minutes later, Viscount Walbrook got up, as if to use the House of Office, but tapped Daniel on the shoulder on his way out of the room. Daniel rose and followed him down a hall – dark except for a convenient red glow at the far end. Daniel couldn't see around the tottering Punchinello silhouette of his host, but he could hear shovels crunching into piles of something, ringing as they flung their loads – obviously coal being fed to a furnace. But sometimes there was the icy trill of a coin falling and spinning on a hard floor. The hall became sooty and extremely warm, and gave way to a brick-lined room where a laborer, stripped to a pair of drawers, was heaving coal into the open door of the House of Ham's forge – which had been hugely expanded when the house was reconstructed after the Fire. Another laborer was pumping bellows with his feet, climbing an endless ladder. In the old days, this forge had been a good size for baking tarts, which made sense for the sort of goldsmith who made earrings and teaspoons. Now it looked like something that could be used to cast cannon-barrels, and half the weight of the building was concentrated in the chimney. Several black iron lock-boxes were open on the floor – some full of silver coins and others empty. One of the Hams' senior clerks sat on the floor by one of these in a pond of his own sweat, counting coins into a dish out loud: 'Ninety-eight . . . ninety-nine . . . hundred!' whereupon he handed the dish up to Charles Ham (the youngest Ham brother – Thomas being the eldest), who emptied it onto the pan of a scale and weighed the coins against a brass cylinder – then raked them off into a bucket-sized crucible. This was repeated until the crucible was nearly full. Then a glowing door was opened – knives of blue flame probed out into the dark room – Charles Ham donned black gauntlets, heaved a gigantic pair of iron tongs off the floor, thrust them in, hugged, and backed away, drawing out another crucible: a cup shining daffodil-colored light. Turning around very carefully, he positioned the crucible (Daniel could've tracked it with his eyes closed, by feeling its warmth shine on his face) and tipped it. A stream of radiant liquid formed in its lip and arced down into a mold of clay. Other molds were scattered about the floor, wherever there was room, cooling down through shades of yellow, orange, red, and sullen brown, to black; but wherever light glanced off of them, it gleamed silver. When the crucible was empty, Charles Ham set it down by the scales, then picked up the crucible that was full of silver coins and put it into the fire. Through all of this, the man on the floor never paused counting coins out of the lock-box, his reedy voice making a steady incantation out of the numbers, the coins going chink, chink, chink. Daniel stepped forward, bent down, took a coin out of the lock-box, and angled it to shine fire-light into his eyes, like the little mirror in the center of Isaac's telescope. He was expecting to see a worn-out shilling with a blurred portrait of Queen Elizabeth on it, or an old piece of eight or thaler that the Hams had somehow picked up in a money-changing transaction. What he saw was in fact the profile of King Charles II, very new and crisp, stamped on a limpid pool of brilliant silver – perfect. Shining that way in firelight, it brought back memories of a night in 1666. Daniel flung it back into the lock-box. Then, not believing his eyes, he thrust his hand in and pulled out a fistful. They were all the same. Their edges, fresh from Monsieur Blondeau's ingenious machine, were so sharp they almost cut his flesh, their mass blood-warm . . . The heat was too much. He was out in the street with Uncle Thomas, bathing in cool air. 'They are still warm !' he exclaimed. Uncle Thomas nodded. 'From the Mint?' 'Yes.' 'You mean to tell me that the coins being stamped out at the Mint are, the very same night , melted down into bullion on Threadneedle Street?' Daniel was noticing, now, that the chimney of Apthorp's shop, two doors up the street, was also smoking, and the same was true of diverse other goldsmiths up and down the length of Threadneedle. Uncle Thomas raised his eyebrows piously. 'Where does it go then ?' Daniel demanded. 'Only a Royal Society man would ask,' said Sterling Waterhouse, who had slipped out to join them. 'What do you mean by that, brother?' Daniel asked. Sterling was walking slowly towards him. Instead of stopping, he flung his arms out wide and collided with Daniel, embraced him and kissed him on the cheek. Not a trace of liquor on his breath. 'No one knows where it goes – that is not the point. The point is that it goes – it moves – the movement ne'er stops – it is the blood in the veins of Commerce.' 'But you must do something with the bullion – ' 'We tender it to gentlemen who give us something in return' said Uncle Thomas. 'It's like selling fish at Billingsgate – do the fishwives ask where the fish go?' 'It's generally known that silver percolates slowly eastwards, and stops in the Orient, in the vaults of the Great Mogul and the Emperor of China,' Sterling said. 'Along the way it might change hands hundreds of times. Does that answer your question?' 'I've already stopped believing I saw it,' Daniel said, and went back into the house, his thin shoe-leather bending over irregular paving-stones, his dull dark clothing hanging about him coarsely, the iron banister cold under his hand – he was a mote bobbing in a mud-puddle and only wanted to be back in the midst of fire and heat and colored radiance. He stood in the forge-room and watched the melting for a while. His favorite part was the sight of the liquid metal building behind the lip of the canted crucible, then breaking out and tracing an arc of light down through the darkness. 'Quicksilver is the elementary form of all things fusible; for all things fusible, when melted, are changed into it, and it mingles with them because it is of the same substance with them . . .' 'Who said that?' Sterling asked – keeping an eye on his little brother, who was showing signs of instability. 'Some damned Alchemist,' Daniel answered. 'I have given up hope, tonight, of ever understanding money.' 'It's simple, really . . .' 'And yet it's not simple at all,' Daniel said. 'It follows simple rules – it obeys logic – and so Natural Philosophy should understand it, encompass it – and I, who know and understand more than almost anyone in the Royal Society, should comprehend it. But I don't. I never will . . . if money is a science, then it is a dark science, darker than Alchemy. It split away from Natural Philosophy millennia ago, and has gone on developing ever since, by its own rules . . .' 'Alchemists say that veins of minerals in the earth are twigs and offshoots of an immense Tree whose trunk is the center of the earth, and that metals rise like sap – ' Sterling said, the firelight on his bemused face. Daniel was too tired at first to take the analogy – or perhaps he was underestimating Sterling. He assumed Sterling was prying for suggestions on where to look for gold mines. But later, as Sterling's coach was taking him off towards Charing Cross, he understood that Sterling had been telling him that the growth of money and commerce was – as far as Natural Philosophers were concerned – like the development of that mysterious subterranean Tree: suspected, sensed, sometimes exploited for profit, but, in the end, unknowable. THE KING'S HEAD TAVERN was dark, but it was not closed. When Daniel entered he saw patches of glowing green light here and there – pooled on tabletops and smeared on walls – and heard Persons of Quality speaking in hushed voices punctuated by outbreaks of riotous giggling. But the glow faded, and then serving-wenches scurried out with rush-lights and re-lit all of the lamps, and finally Daniel could see Pepys and Wilkins and Comstock, and the Duke of Gunfleet, and Sir Christopher Wren, and Sir Winston Churchill, and – at the best table – the Earl of Upnor, dressed in what amounted to a three-dimensional Persian carpet, trimmed with fur and studded with globs of colored glass, or perhaps they were precious gems. Upnor was explaining phosphorus to three gaunt women with black patches glued all over their faces and necks: 'It is known, to students of the Art, that each metal is created when rays from a particular planet strike and penetrate the Earth, videlicet, the Sun's rays create gold; the Moon's, silver; Mercury's, quicksilver; Venus's, copper; Mars's, iron; Jupiter's, tin; and Saturn's lead. Mr. Root's discovery of a new elemental substance suggests there may be another planet – presumably of a green color – beyond the orbit of Saturn.' Daniel edged toward a table where Churchill and Wren were talking past each other, staring ever so thoughtfully at nothing: 'It faces to the east, and it's rather far north, isn't it? Perhaps His Majesty should name it New Edinburgh . . .' 'That would only give the Presbyterians ideas!' Churchill scoffed. 'It's not that far north,' Pepys put in from another table. 'Boston is farther north by one and a half degrees of latitude.' 'We can't go wrong suggesting that he name it after himself . . .' 'Charlestown? That name is already in use – Boston again.' 'His brother then? But Jamestown was used in Virginia.' 'What are you talking about?' Daniel inquired. 'New Amsterdam! His Majesty is acquiring it in exchange for Surinam,' Churchill said. 'Speak up, Sir Winston, there may be some Vagabonds out in Dorset who didn't hear you!' Pepys roared. 'His Majesty has asked the Royal Society to suggest a new name for it,' Churchill added, sotto voce. 'Hmmm . . . his brother sort of conquered the place, didn't he?' Daniel asked. He knew the answer, but couldn't presume to lecture men such as these. 'Yes,' Pepys said learnedly, ' 'twas all part of York's Atlantic campaign – firsthe took several Guinea ports, rich in gold, and richer in slaves, from the Dutchmen, and then it was straight down the trade winds to his next prize – New Amsterdam.' Daniel made a small bow toward Pepys, then continued: 'If you can't use his Christian name of James, perhaps you can use his title . . . after all, York is a city up to the north on our eastern coast – and yet not too far north . . .' 'We have already considered that,' Pepys said glumly. 'There's a Yorktown in Virginia.' 'What about ‘New York'?' Daniel asked. 'Clever . . . but too obviously derivative of ‘New Amsterdam,'' Churchill said. 'If we call it ‘New York,' we're naming it after the city of York . . . the point is to name it after the Duke of York,' Pepys scoffed. Daniel said, 'You are correct, of course – ' 'Oh, come now!' Wilkins barked, slapping a table with the flat of his hand, splashing beer and phosphorus all directions. 'Don't be pedantic, Mr. Pepys. Everyone will understand what it means.' 'Everyone who is clever enough to matter, anyway,' Wren put in. 'Err . . . I see, you are proposing a more subtile approach,' Sir Winston Churchill muttered. 'Let's put it on the list!' Wilkins suggested. 'It can't hurt to include as many ‘York' and ‘James' names as we can possibly think up.' 'Hear, hear!' Churchill harrumphed – or possibly he was just clearing his throat – or summoning a barmaid. 'As you wish – never mind,' Daniel said. 'I take it that Mr. Root's Demonstration was well received – ?' For some reason this caused eyes to swivel, ever so briefly, toward the Earl of Upnor. 'It went well,' Pepys said, drawing closer to Daniel, 'until Mr. Root threatened to spank the Earl. Don't look at him, don't look at him,' Pepys continued levelly, taking Daniel's arm and turning him away from the Earl. The timing was unfortunate, because Daniel was certain he had just overhead Upnor mentioning Isaac Newton by name, and wanted to eavesdrop. Pepys led him past Wilkins, who was good-naturedly spanking a barmaid. The publican rang a bell and everyone blew out the lights – the tavern went dark except for the freshly invigorated phosphorus. Everyone said 'Woo!' and Pepys wrangled Daniel out into the street. 'You know that Mr. Root makes the stuff from urine?' 'So it is rumored,' Daniel said. 'Mr. Newton knows more of the Art than I do – he has told me that Enoch the Red was following an ancient recipe to extract the Philosophic Mercury from urine, but happened upon phosphorus instead.' 'Yes, and he has an entire tale that he tells, of how he found the recipe in Babylonia.' Pepys rolled his eyes. 'Enthralled the courtiers. Anyway – for this evening's Demo', he'd collected urine from a sewer that drains Whitehall, and boiled it – endlessly – on a barge in the Thames. I'll spare you the rest of the details – suffice it to say that when it was finished, and they were done applauding, and all of the courtiers were groping for a way to liken the King's splendor and radiance to that of Phosphorus – ' 'Oh, yes, I suppose that would've been obligatory – ?' Wilkins banged out the tavern door, apparently just to watch the story being related to Daniel. 'The Earl of Upnor made some comment to the effect that some kingly essence – a royal humour – must suffuse the King's body, and be excreted in his urine, to account for all of this. And when all of the other courtiers were finished agreeing, and marveling at the Earl's philosophick acumen, Enoch the Red said, ‘In truth, most of this urine came from the Horse Guards – and their horses.'' 'Whereat, the Earl was on his feet! His hand reaching for his sword – to defend His Majesty's honor, of course,' Wilkins said. 'What was His Majesty's state of mind?' Daniel asked. Wilkins made his hands into scale-pans and bobbled them up and down. 'Then Mr. Pepys tipped the scales. He related an anecdote from the Restoration, in 1660, when he had been on the boat with the King, and certain members of his household – including the Earl of Upnor, then no more than twelve years old. Also aboard was the King's favorite old dog. The dog shit in the boat. The young Earl kicked at the dog, and made to throw it overboard – but was stayed by the King, who laughed at it, and said, ‘You see, in some ways, at least, Kings are like other men!'' 'Did he really say such a thing!?' Daniel exclaimed, and instantly felt like an idiot – 'Of course not!' Pepys said, 'I merely told the story that way because I thought it would be useful – ' 'And was it?' 'The King laughed,' Pepys said with finality. 'And Enoch Root inquired, whether it had then been necessary to give the Earl a spanking, to teach him respect for his elders.' 'Elders?' 'The dog was older than the Earl – come on, pay attention!' Pepys said, giving Daniel a tremendous frown. 'Strikes me as an unwise thing to have said,' Daniel muttered. 'The King said, ‘No, no, Upnor has always been a civil fellow,' or some such, and so there was no duel.' 'Still, Upnor strikes me as a grudge-holder – ' 'Enoch has sent better men than Upnor to Hell – don't trouble yourself about his future,' Wilkins said. 'You need to tend to your own faults, young fellow – excessive sobriety, e.g. . . .' 'A tendency to fret – ' Pepys put in. 'Undue chastity – let's back to the tavern!' HE WOKE UP SOMETIME THE next day on a hired coach bound for Cambridge – sharing a confined space with Isaac Newton, and a load of gear that Isaac had bought in London: a six-volume set of Theatrum Chemicum ,*numerous small crates stuffed with straw, the long snouts of retorts poking out – canisters of stuff that smelled odd. Isaac was saying, 'If you throw up again, please aim for this bowl – I'm collecting bile.' Daniel was able to satisfy him there. 'Where Enoch the Red failed, you're going to succeed – ?' 'I beg your pardon?' 'Going after the Philosophic Mercury, Isaac?' 'What else is there to do?' 'The R.S. adores your telescope,' Daniel said. 'Oldenburg wants you to write more on the subject.' 'Mmm,' Isaac said, lost in thought, comparing passages in three different books to one another. 'Could you hold this for a moment, please?' Which was how Daniel came to be a human book-rest for Isaac. Not that he was in any condition to accomplish greater things. In his lap for the next hour was a tome: folio-sized, four inches thick, bound in gold and silver, obviously made centuries before Gutenberg. Daniel was going to blurt, This must have been fantastically expensive, but on closer investigation found a book-plate pasted into it, bearing the arms of Upnor, and a note from the Earl: Mr. Newton – May this volume become as treasured by you, as the memory of our fortuitous meeting is to me – UPNOR. AboardMinerva, Cape Cod Bay, Massachusetts NOVEMBER 1713 WHEN THEY'VE MADE it out of Plymouth and into Cape Cod Bay, van Hoek returns to his cabin and becomes Captain once more. He looks rather put out to find the place so discomposed. Perhaps this is a sign of Daniel's being a bitter old Atheistical crank, but he nearly laughs out loud. Minerva 's a collection of splinters loosely pulled together by nails, pegs, lashings, and oakum, not even large enough to count as a mote in the eye of the world – more like one of those microscopic eggs that Hooke discovered with his microscope. She floats only because boys mind her pumps all the time, she remains upright and intact only because highly intelligent men never stop watching the sky and seas around her. Every line and sail decays with visible speed, like snow in sunlight, and men must work ceaselessly worming, parceling, serving, tarring, and splicing her infinite net-work of hempen lines in order to prevent her from falling apart in mid-ocean with what Daniel imagines would be explosive suddenness. Like a snake changing skins, she sloughs away what is worn and broken and replaces it from inner reserves – evoluting as she goes. The only way to sustain this perpetual and necessary evolution is to replenish the stocks that dwindle from her holds as relentlessly as sea-water leaks in. The only way to do that is to trade goods from one port to another, making a bit of money on each leg of the perpetual voyage. Each day assails her with hurricanes and pirate-fleets. To go out on the sea and find a Minerva is like finding, in the desert, a Great Pyramid blanced upside-down on its tip. She's a baby in a basket – a book in a bonfire. And yet van Hoek has the temerity to appoint his cabin as if it were a gentleman's drawing-room, with delicate weather-glasses, clocks, optickal devices, a decent library, a painting or two, an enamel cabinet stocked with Chinese crockery, a respectable stock of brandy and port. He's got mirrors in here, for Christ's sake. Not only that, but when he enters to discover a bit of broken glass on the deck, and small impact-craters here and there, he becomes so outraged that Dappa doesn't need to tell Daniel they'd best leave him alone for a while. 'So the curtain has come down on your performance. Now, a man in your position might feel like a barnacle – unable to leave the ship – an annoyance to mariners – but on Minerva there is a job for everyone,' says Dappa, leading him down the midships staircase to the gundeck. Daniel's not paying attention. A momentous rearrangement has taken place since Daniel was last here. All of the obstructions that formerly cluttered the space have been moved elsewhere or thrown overboard to create rights-of-way for the cannons. These had been lashed up against the inside of the hull, but now they've been swung round ninety degrees and each aimed at its gunport. As they are maneuvering on Cape Cod Bay, miles from the nearest Foe, those gunports are all closed for now. But like stage-hands laboring in the back of a theatre, the seamen are hard at work with diverse arcane tools, viz. lin-stocks, quoins, gunner's picks, and worming-irons. One man's got what looks like a large magnifying-glass, except without the glass – it's an empty circle of iron on a handle. He sits astride a crate of cannonballs, heaving them out one at a time and passing them through the ring to gauge them, sorting them into other crates. Others whittle and file round blocks of wood, called sabots, and strap cannonballs to them. But anyone carrying a steel blade is distinctly unwelcome near the powder-barrels, because steel makes sparks. One sailor, an Irishman, is talking to one of the Plymouth whaleboat pirates captured this morning. A cannon is between the two men, and when a cannon is between two men, that is what they talk about. 'This is Wapping Wendy, or W.W., or dub-dub as we sometimes dub her in the heat of battle, though you may call her ‘darling' or ‘love of my life' but never ‘Wayward Wendy' as that lot – ' glowering at the crew of another gun, 'Mr. Foote,' “ – like to defame her.' 'Is she? Wayward?' 'She's like any other lass, you must get to know her, and then what might seem inconstant is clearly revealed as a kind of consistency – faithfulness even. And so the first thing you must know about our darling girl is that her bore tends up and to larboard of her centerline. And she's a tight one, is our virginal Wendy, which is why we on the dub-dub crew must keep a sharp eye for undersized balls and husband 'em carefully . . .' Someone on the crew of 'Manila Surprise' nudges that gun's port open for a moment, and sun shines in. But Manila Surprise is on the larboard side of the ship. 'We are sailing southwards!?' Daniel exclaims. 'No better way to run before a north wind,' Dappa says. 'But in that direction, Cape Cod is only a few miles away! What sort of an escape route is that?' 'As you have reckoned, we shall have to work to windwards eventually in order to escape from Cape Cod Bay,' Dappa says agreeably. 'When we do, Teach's fleet will be tacking along with us. But his ships are fore-and-aft rigged and can sail closer to the wind, and make better headway, than our dear Minerva, a square-rigger. Advantage Teach.' 'Shouldn't we head north while we can, then?' 'He would catch us in a matter of minutes – his entire fleet together, working in concert. We want to fight Teach's ships one at a time if we can. So southwards it is, for now. Running before the wind in full sail, we are faster than they. So Teach knows that if he pursues us to the south we may lose him. But he also knows that we must wheel about and work northwards before long – so he will spread out a sort of picket-line and wait for us.' 'But will Teach not anticipate all of this, and take pains to keep his fleet together?' 'In a well-disciplined fleet, pursuing Victory, that's how it would go. But that is a pirate-fleet, in pursuit of plunder, and by the rules and account-books of piracy, the lion's share goes to the ship that takes the prize.' 'Ah – so the captain of each ship has incentive to split away and attack us individually.' 'Just so, Dr. Waterhouse.' 'But would it not be foolhardy for a little sloop to engage a ship with all – this?' Daniel gestures down the length of the gundeck – a bustling bazaar where cannonballs, sabots, and powder-kegs, lies, promises, and witticisms are being exchanged lustily. 'Not if the ship is undermanned, and the captain a senile poltroon. Now, if you'll just follow me down into the hold – don't worry, I'll get this lantern lit, soon as we are away from the gunpowder – there, that's it. She's a tidy ship, wouldn't you agree?' 'Beg pardon? Tidy? Yes, I suppose, as ships go . . .' says Dr. Waterhouse, finding Dappa, sometimes, too subtle – an excess of quicksilver in the constitution. 'Thank you, sir. But 'Tis a disadvantage, when we have to fight with blunderbusses. The virtue of a blunderbuss, as you may know, is to make a weapon out of whatever nails, pebbles, splinters, and fragments might be lying about – but here on Minerva we make a practice of sweeping that matter up, and throwing it overboard, several times daily. At times like this we do regret that we neglected to hoard it.' 'I know more than you imagine of blunderbusses. What do you want me to do?' 'In a little while, one of the men'll be teaching you how to fuze mortar-bombs – but we're not quite ready for that just yet – now I would ask you to go down into the hold and – ' Dr. Waterhouse doesn't believe, until he's down there, what Dappa tells him next. He hasn't seen the hold yet, and reckons it'll be like the shambolic Repository at the Royal Society – but no. The great casks and bales are stacked, and lashed in place, with admirable neatness, and there is even a Diagram tacked to the staircase bulkhead in which the location of each object is specified, and notes made as to what's stored there and when it was done. Underneath, under a subheading labelledbilge , van Hoek himself has scratched 'out-moded china – keep handy.' Dappa has pulled two sailors away from what they've been doing the last half-hour: standing by a gunport carrying on a learned discourse about an approaching pirate-sloop. The sailors considered this to be time well spent, but Dappa felt otherwise. These two spend a minute consulting the Diagram, and Daniel realizes with moderate astonishment that they both know how to read, and interpret figures. They agree that the out-moded china is to be found forward, and so that's where they go – to the most beautiful part of the ship, where many ribs radiate from the up-curving keel, forming an upside-down vault, so it's like being a fly exploring the ceiling of a cathedral. The sailors move a few crates out of the way – they never stop talking, each trying to outdo the other in bloodcurdling yarns about the cruelty of certain infamous pirates. They pull up a hatch that gives access to the bilge, and in no time at all two crates of markedly ugly china have been fetched out. The crates themselves are handsome productions of clear-grained red cedar, chosen because it won't rot in the wet bilge. Into them the china has been thrown with no packing material between items, so part of Daniel's work is already done. He thanks the two sailors and they look back at him queerly, then return abovedecks. Daniel spreads an old hammock – two yards of sailcloth – on the planking, tips a crate over, and then attacks its spilled contents with a maul. What is the optimal size (he wonders) of a shard of pottery for firing out of a blunderbuss? When the King's guards shot him before his father's house during the Fire, he was knocked down, bruised, cut, but not really penetrated.Probably the larger the better, which makes his job easier – one would like to see great sharp triangles of gaudily-painted porcelain spinning through the air, plunging into pirate-flesh, severing major vessels. But too large and it won't pack into the barrels. He decides to aim for a mean diameter of half an inch, and mauls the plates accordingly, sweeping chunks that are the right size off into small canvas bags, raking bigger ones toward him for more punishment. It is satisfying, and after a while he finds himself singing an old song: the same one he sang with Oldenburg in Broad Arrow Tower. He keeps time with his hammer, and draws out those notes that make the cargo-hold resonate. All round him, water seeps through the cracks between Minerva 's hull-planks (for he is well below the water-line) and trickles down merrily into the bilge, and the four-man pumps take it away with a steady suck-and-hiss that's like the systole and diastole of a beating heart. Gresham's College, Bishopsgate, London 1672 The Inquisitive Jesuit RICCIOLI has taken great pains by 77 Arguments to overthrow the Copernican Hypothesis. . . . I believe this one Discovery will answer them, and 77 more, if so many can be thought of and produced against it. – ROBERT HOOKE DANIEL SPENT A GOOD PART of two months on the roof of Gresham's College, working on a hole – making, not mending, one. Hooke could not do it because his vertigo had been acting up, and if it struck while he was on top of the College, he would plunge to the ground like a wormy apple from a tree, his Last Experiment a study into the mysterious power of Gravitation. For a man who claimed to hate the appearance of sharp things when viewed under a microscope, Hooke spent a great deal of time honing jabs at Inquisitive Jesuits. While Daniel was up on the roof making the hole, and a rain-hatch to cover it, Hooke was safe at ground level, running up and down a gallery. Strapped into his groin was a narrow hard saddle, and projecting from the saddle a strut with a wheel on the end, geared to a clock-work dial: a pedometer of his own design, which enabled him to calculate how much distance he had covered going nowhere.The purpose – as he explained to Daniel and diverse other aghast Fellows of the R.S. – was not to get from point A to point B, but to sweat. In some way, sweating would purge his body of whatever caused his headaches, nausea, and vertigo. From time to time, he would stop and refresh himself by drinking a glass of elemental mercury. He had set up a table at one end of the gallery where he stockpiled that and several of Mons. LeFebure's fashionable medicines. There were various sorts of quills, too. Some of them he used to tickle the back of his throat and induce vomiting, others he sharpened, dipped in ink, and used to note down data from his pedometer, or to vent his spleen at Jesuits who refused to admit that the Earth revolved around the Sun, or to sketch out plans for Bedlam, or to write diatribes against Oldenburg, or simply to transact the routine business of the City Surveyor. The Inquisitive Jesuit Riccioli had pointed out that if the heavens were sown with stars, some near and some far, and if the Earth were looping round the Sun in a vast ellipse, then the positions of those stars with respect to one another should shift during the course of the year, as trees in a forest changed their relative positions in the eyes of a traveler moving past. But no such parallax had been observed, which proved (to Riccioli, anyway) that the Earth must be fixed in the center of the Universe. To Hooke it only proved that good enough telescopes hadn't been built, nor precise enough measurements made. To obtain the level of magnification he needed, he had to construct a telescope 32 feet long. To annull the light-bending effects of the Earth's atmosphere (which were obvious from the fact that the Sun became an oval when it rose or set), he had to aim it straight up – hence the demand for a vertical shaft to be bored through Gresham's College. Gresham's antique mansion was now like an ancient plaster wall that had been mended so many times it consisted entirely of interlocked patches. It was solid scar tissue. This made the work more interesting for Daniel, and taught him more than he'd ever cared to know about how buildings were put up, and what kept them from falling down. The goal was to gaze straight up into Heaven, and count the miles to the nearest stars. But as Daniel did most of the work during the daytime, he spent most of his idle moments looking down into London – six years since the Fire now – but its reconstruction really just getting underway. Formerly Gresham's College had huddled among buildings of about the same height, but the Fire had burnt almost to its front door, and so now it loomed like a manor house over a devastated fiefdom. If Daniel stood on the ridge of the roof, facing south toward London Bridge half a mile away, everything in his field of view bore marks of heat and smoke. Suppose the city were a giant Hooke-watch, with Gresham's College the central axle-tree, and London Bridge marking twelve o'clock. Then Bedlam was directly behind Daniel at six o'clock. The Tower of London was at about ten o'clock. The easterly wind, and its glacis, had preserved it from the flames. The wedge from the Tower to the Bridge was a tangle of old streets with charred spikes of old church-steeples jutting up here and there, like surveyor's stakes – literally. This to the chagrin of Hooke, who'd presented the City with a plan to rationalize the streets, only to be frustrated by a few such impediments that had survived the flames; for those who opposed his plans used the carbonized steeples as landmarks to shew where streets had once been, and ought to be remade, be they never so narrow and tortuous. The negative space between construction-sites defined new streets now, only a little wider and straighter than the old. Right in the center of this wedge was the place where the Fire had started – an empty moon-crater cordoned off so that Hooke and Wren could build a monument there. Directly before Daniel, in the wedge from about noon to one o'clock, was the old goldsmiths' district of Threadneedle and Cornhill streets, which converged at the site of the Royal Exchange – all so close that Daniel could hear the eternal flame of buying and selling in the courtyard of the ‘Change, fueled by the latest data from abroad, and he could look into the windows of Thomas Ham's house and see Mayflower (like a matron) plumping pillows and (like a schoolgirl) playing leapfrog with William Ham, her youngest child, her dear heart. The west-bound street formed by the confluence of Threadneedle and Cornhill became Cheapside, which Hooke had insisted on making much wider than it had been before – eliciting screams of agony and near-apocalyptic rantings from many – attacks that Hooke, who cared less than anyone what people thought of him, was uniquely qualified to ignore. It ran straight as Hooke could make it to the once and future St. Paul's, now a moraine of blackened stones, congealed roofing-lead, and plague-victims' jumbled bones. Wren was still working on plans and models for the new one. The streets limning St. Paul's Churchyard were lined with printers' shops, including the ones that produced most Royal Society publications, so the trip up and down Cheapside had become familiar to Daniel, as he went there to fetch copies of Hooke's Micrographia or inspect the proofs for Wilkins's Universal Character . Raising his sights a notch and gazing over the scab of St. Paul's (which stood at about two o'clock), he could see Bridewell on the far side of it – a former Royal palace, now tumbledown, where whores, actresses, and Vagabond-wenches picked oakum, pounded hemp, and carried out diverse other character-building chores, until they had become reformed. That marked the place where the Fleet River – which was simply a ditch full of shit – intersected the Thames. Which explained why the Royals had moved out of Bridewell and ceded it to the poor. The fire had jumped the ditch easily, and kept eating through the city until a shortage of fuel, and the King's and Lord Mayor's heroic house-bombing campaign, had finally drawn a lasso around it. So whenever he did this Daniel inevitably had to trace the dividing-line between burnt and unburnt parts of the city from the River up across Fleet Street as far as Holborn (three o'clock). Out back of the place where his father had been blown up six years ago, a quadrangle had been laid out, lined with houses and shops, and filled with gardens, fountains, and statues. Others just like it were going up all around, and starting to crowd in around the edges of those few great Houses along Piccadilly, such as Comstock House. But those developments, and the great successes they had brought to Sterling and Raleigh, were old news to Daniel, and didn't command his attention as much as certain strange new undertakings around the edges of the city. If he turned and looked north over the bones of the old Roman wall he could look right into Bedlam less than a quarter of a mile away. It had not been burnt, but the city had hired Hooke to tear it down and rebuild it anyway, as long as they were rebuilding everything else. The joke being that London and Bedlam seemed to have exchanged places: for Bedlam had been emptied out and torn down in preparation for its reconstruction, and was a serene rock-garden now, whereas all of London (save a few special plots such as the Monument site and St. Paul's) was in the throes of building – stones and bricks and timbers moving through the city on streets so congested that watching them fill up in the morning was like watching sausage casings being stuffed with meat. Wrecked buildings being torn down, cellars being dug, mortar being mixed, paving-stones being flung off carts, bricks and stones being chiselled to fit, iron wheel-rims grinding over cobbles – all of it made noise that merged together into a mad grind, like a Titan chewing up a butte. So: strange enough. But beyond Bedlam, to the north and northeast, and sweeping round beyond the Tower along the eastern skirts of the city, were several artillery-grounds and army camps. These had been busy of late, because of the Anglo-Dutch War. Not the same Anglo-Dutch war that Isaac had listened to from his orchard in Woolsthorpe six years ago, for that had concluded in 1667. This was a wholly new and different Anglo-Dutch War, the third in as many decades. This time around, though, the English had finally gotten it right: they were allied with the French. Ignoring all considerations of what was really in the best interests of England, and setting aside all questions of moral rightness (and the current King was rarely troubled and little hindered by either), this seemed like a much better plan than fighting against France. Plenty of French gold had entered the country to bring Parliament around to Louis XIV's side, and to pay for a lot of ships to be built. France had an immense army and needed little help from England on land; what Louis had bought, and paid for several times over, was the Royal Navy, and its guns, and its gunpowder. It was difficult, therefore, for Daniel to make any sense of the project underway northeast of London. Over several weeks Daniel watched a flat parade-ground develop pits and wrinkles, which slowly grew to ditches and mounds, and shaped and resolved themselves (as if he were adjusting the focus of a prospective glass) into sharp neat earthworks. Daniel had never seen such things because, until now, they had not been built in England, but from books and siege-paintings he knew them as ramparts, a bastion, ravelins, and a demilune work. But if this were a preparation for Dutch invasion, it was poorly thought out, because these works stood in isolation, protecting nothing save a pasture with a few dozen befuddled, but extremely well-defended, cows. Nevertheless, guns were mustered out from the Ordnance storehouses in the Tower, and hauled up onto the ramparts by teams of straining oxen – hernias with legs. The cracks of the teamsters' whips and the snorts and bellows of the beasts were carried for miles on a sea breeze all the way across Houndsditch and over the Wall and up the pitched roof of Gresham's College into Daniel's ears. Daniel for his part only stared in amaze. Nearer the river, in the flat country beyond the Tower, Naval works took over from Military ones: shipyards messy with blond timber from Scotland or Massachusetts, splattered planks drawing themselves up into the curved hulls of ships, dead firs resurrected as masts. Colossal plumes of black smoke spreading downwind, pointing to Comstock-forges where tons of iron were being melted down and poured into subterranean cannon-molds, and windmill-blades rolling on the horizon, turning the gear-trains of mighty Comstock-machines that bored holes down the centers of those cannons. Which brought Daniel's gaze back to the Tower, where he'd started: the central mystery, where treasure-ships from (as everyone in London now knew) France brought in the gold to be minted into the guineas that paid for all of those ships and cannons, and for the services of England in its new role as a sort of naval auxiliary to France. ONE DAY, HEARING CHURCH-BELLS RING two o'clock, Daniel descended the ladder through the telescope-shaft. Hooke had gone out to inspect some new pavement, leaving behind nothing but a faint metallic scent of vomit. Daniel walked directly across the street, dodging uncouth traffic of heavy carts. He climbed into Samuel Pepys's carriage and made himself comfortable. Several minutes passed. Daniel looked at passers-by out the window. A hundred yards south, the streets would be a-bustle with brokers of East India stocks and goldsmiths' notes, but this place, tucked up against London wall, was a queer eddy, or backwater, and Daniel observed a jumble of Navy men, Dissident preachers, Royal Society hangers-on, foreigners, and Vagabonds, stirring and shuffling about one another in no steady pattern. It was an inscrutable Gordian knot suddenly cleft by one Chase Scene: a scruffy barefoot boy came bolting up Broad Street, pursued by a bailiff with a cudgel. Glimpsing a side street that ran off to the left, between the Navy Treasury and the Dutch Church, the boy skidded round the corner – paused – considered matters – and freed himself of a burden by heaving a pale brick into the air. It sheared apart, the wind caught it, and it puffed into a cloud of fluttering rectangles, whirling mysteriously round their long axes. By the time Daniel or anyone else thought to look for him, the boy was gone. The bailiff shifted to a straddling gait, as if riding an invisible pony, and began trying to step on all of the libels at once, gathering them in his arms, stuffing them into his pockets. Several members of the Watch stormed up and exchanged monosyllabic gasping noises with the bailiff. They all turned and glared at the façade of the Dutch Church, then went back to rounding up handbills. Samuel Pepys was preceded by his cologne and his wig, and pursued by a minion embracing a sheaf of giant rolled documents. 'I thought it well played, on the boy's part,' he said, climbing into the coach and handing Daniel one of the libels. 'An old trick of the trade,' Daniel said. Pepys looked delighted. 'Drake put you out on the streets?' 'Of course . . . 'twas the common rite of passage for all Waterhouse boys.' The handbill was a cartoon depicting King Louis XIV of France with his breeches piled up round his ankles and hairy buttocks thrust out, shitting an immense turd into the mouth of an English sailor. 'Let's take it to Wilkins! It'll cheer him up enormously,' Pepys suggested, and pounded on the ceiling. The coachman drove the horses forward. Daniel made his body go limp so that he would not accrue lacerations from the continual battering onslaughts of the vehicle's benches and bulkheads. 'Did you bring it?' 'I always have it with me,' Pepys said, producing an irregular nodule about the size of a tennis ball, 'as you have all your parts.' 'To remind you of your own mortality?' 'Once a man's been cut for the stone, 'Tis hardly necessary. ' 'Why, then?' 'It is my conversation-starter of last resort. It gets anyone talking: Germans, Puritans, Red Indians . . .' He handed the object to Daniel. It was heavy. Heavy as a stone. 'I cannot believe this came out of your bladder,' Daniel said. 'You see? Never fails!' Pepys answered. But Daniel got no further response from Pepys, who'd already unrolled one of the large documents, creating a screen that divided the carriage in half. Daniel had assumed that they were all diagrams of men-of-war. But when they turned west on Cheapside the sun came in the carriage window and shone through the paper, revealing a grid of numbers. Pepys muttered things to his assistant, who jotted them down. Daniel was left to rotate the bladder-stone in his hand and gaze out at London, so different when seen at street-level. Passing through St. Paul's Churchyard, they saw the whole contents of a printer's shop turned out into the street – several bailiffs, and one of Sir Roger L'Estrange's lieutenants, pawing through stacks of unbound sheets, and holding wood-blocks up to mirrors. Within a few minutes, anyway, they were at Wilkins's house. Pepys left his assistant and his papers below in the carriage and pounded up stairs holding the bladder-stone in his hand like a questing knight brandishing a fragment of the Cross. He shook it in Wilkins's face. Wilkins only laughed. But it was good that he did, because his room was otherwise a horror – his dark breeches couldn't conceal that he had been pissing blood, sometimes sooner than he could get to the chamber-pot. He was both wizened and bloated at the same time, if that were possible, and the smell that came out of his flesh seemed to suggest his kidneys weren't keeping up their end of the bargain. While Pepys exhorted the Bishop of Chester to allow himself to be cut for the stone, Daniel looked about, and was dispirited but not surprised to see several empty bottles from the apothecary shop of Monsieur LeFebure. He gave one a sniff. It was Elixir Proprietalis LeFebure:the same stuff Hooke swallowed when headaches had brought him to the brink of suicide – the fruits of LeFebure's researches into certain remarkable properties of the poppy family. It was hugely popular at Court, even among those not afflicted with headaches or the Stone. But when Daniel saw Wilkins go into a bladder spasm – reducing the Lord Bishop of Chester, and Founder of the Royal Society, to a dumb animal for several minutes, convulsing and howling – he decided perhaps Monsieur LeFebure was not such a sinister fellow after all. When it was over, and Wilkins was Wilkins again, Daniel showed him the handbill, and mentioned L'Estrange's raid on the printing-shop. 'The same men doing the same things as ten years ago,' Wilkins pronounced. From that – the same men – Daniel knew that the originator of the handbills, and ultimate target of L'Estrange's raids, must be Knott Bolstrood. 'And that is why I cannot stop what I am doing to be cut for the Stone,' Wilkins said. DANIEL ERECTED A BLOCK AND TACKLE above the Gresham shaft, Hooke put the rebuilding of London on hold for a day, and they put the long telescope into place, Hooke cringing and screaming every time it was bumped, as if the instrument were an extension of his own eyeball. Meanwhile Daniel could never keep his attention fixed on the heavens, for the warm mutterings and nudgings of London would not leave him alone – notes slipped under his door, raised eyebrows in coffee-shops, odd things witnessed in the street all captured his attention more than they should've. Outside the city, scaffolding rose up from the glacis of those mysterious fortifications, and long benches began to shingle it. Then, one afternoon, Daniel and all London's Persons of Quality and most of her pickpockets were there, sitting on those benches or milling about in the fields. The Duke of Monmouth rode out, in a Cavalier outfit whose magnificence was such as to refute and demolish every sermon ever preached by a Calvinist – because if those sermons were true, Monmouth ought to be struck dead on the spot by a jealous God. John Churchill – possibly the only man in England handsomer than Monmouth – therefore wore slightly less thrilling clothes. The King of France could not attend this event, as he was so busy conquering the Dutch Republic just now, but a strapping actor pranced out in his stead, dressed in royal ermine, and took up a throne on an artificial hillock, and occupied himself with suitable bits of stage-business, viz. peering at events through a glass; pointing things out to diverse jewelled mistresses draped all about his vicinity; holding out his Sceptre to order his troops forward; descending from his throne to speak a few kind words to wounded officers who were brought up to him on litters; standing up and striking a grave defiant pose during moments of crisis, whilst holding out a steady hand to calm his jittery femmes. Likewise an actor had been hired to play the role of D'Artagnan. Since everyone knew what was about to happen to him, he got the most applause when he was introduced – to the visible chagrin of the (real) Duke of Monmouth. In any event: cannons were discharged picturesquely from the ramparts of 'Maestricht,' and 'Dutchmen' struck defiant poses on the battlements, creating among the spectators a frisson of righteous anger (how dare those insolent Dutchmen defend themselves!?) – rapidly transmuted into patriotic fervor as, at a signal from 'Louis XIV,' Monmouth and Churchill led a charge up the slope of the demilune work. After a bit of thrilling swordplay and much spattering-about of stage-blood, they planted French and English flags side by side on the parapet, shook hands with 'D'Artagnan,' and exchanged all manner of fond and respectful gestures with the 'King' on his hillock. There was an ovation. Daniel could hear nothing else, but he saw some odd sort of pratfall directly in front of him: a young man in severe dark clothing, who'd been standing in front of Daniel and blocking his view with a sort of Pilgrim-hat, turned round and splayed his limbs out like a squashed bug, let his head loll back on his white collar, stuck his tongue out, and rolled his eyes back in their sockets. He was mocking the pose of several 'Dutch' defenders who were now hors de combat up on the demilune. He did not make a very pretty picture. Something was grievously wrong with his face: a dermatological catastrophe about the cheeks. Behind him, a scene-change was underway: the dead defenders were resurrecting themselves and scurrying round back of the ramparts to prepare for the next act. Likewise the man in front of Daniel now recovered his balance and turned out not to be a dead Dutchman at all, just a young English bloke with a sour look about him. His attire was not just any drab garb but the specific drab garb worn, nowadays, by Barkers. But (now that Daniel thought about it slightly harder) it was very like the clothing worn by the mock-Dutchmen pretending to defend Maestricht. Come to think of it, those 'Dutchmen' had looked a great deal more like English religious Dissenters than they had like actual Dutchmen, who (if the grapevine was to be believed) had long ago ditched their old Pilgrimish togs (which had been inspired by Spanish fashions anyway) and now dressed like everyone else in Europe. So in addition to being a re-enactment of the Siege of Maestricht, this show was also a parable about well-dressed rakes and blades overcoming dull severe Calvinists in the streets of London town! The slowness with which Daniel realized all this was infuriating to the young Barker in front of him – who had the cannonball head and mighty jawbone of an authentic Bolstrood. 'Is that Gomer?' Daniel exclaimed, when the ovation had died away into a thrum of thirsty squires calling for beer. Daniel had known the son of Knott Bolstrood as a little boy, but hadn't set eyes on him in at least a decade. Gomer Bolstrood answered the question by staring Daniel full in the face. On the front of each of his cheeks, just to either side of his nose, was an old wound: a complex of red trenches and fleshy ramparts, curved round into the crude glyph 'S.L.' These marks had been made by a branding iron in the open-air court before the Sessions House at the Old Bailey, a few moments after Gomer had been pronounced guilty of being a Seditious Libeller. Gomer Bolstrood could not be more than twenty-five years old, but that munition-like head, combined with those brands, gave him the presence of a much older man. He aimed his chin significantly towards a location off behind the stands. Gomer Bolstrood, son of His Majesty's Secretary of State Knott, son of ur-Barker Gregory, led Daniel into a Vagabond-camp of tents and wagons set up to serve and support this gala re-enactment. Some of the tents were for the actors and actresses. Gomer led Daniel between a couple of those, which meant fighting their way against a flood tide of 'French Mistresses' coming back from the 'Sun King's' throne. Even as the sensitive eyes of Isaac Newton had been semi-permanently branded with the image of the solar disk during his colors experiments, so Daniel's retinas were now stamped with a dozen or more cleavages. All of those cleavages must have had heads up above them somewhere – but the only one he noticed was speaking to one of the other girls in a French accent. From which he reckoned (in retrospect, somewhat simple-mindedly) that she must be French. But before Daniel could drift off into a full reverie, Gomer Bolstrood had grabbed his upper arm and pulled him ‘tween the flaps of an adjoining beer tent. The beer was Dutch. So was the man sitting at the table. But the waffle that the man was eating was indisputably Belgian. Daniel sat in the chair indicated, and watched the Dutch gentleman eat the waffle for a while. He aimed his eyes in that direction, anyway. The image that still persisted before his eyes was cleavages, and the face of that 'French' lass. But after a while this, sadly, faded, and was replaced by a waffle that had been put in front of him on a Delft china plate. And none of your crude heavy Pilgrim-ware, but the good stuff, export-grade. He sensed an implicit demand that he should Partake. So he dissected a corner from the waffle, put it in his mouth, and began to chew it. It was good. His eyes were adjusting to the dimness of the tent, and he was noticing stacks of handbills piled up in the corners, neatly wrapped up in old proof-sheets. The words on the proof-sheets were in every language save English – these bills had been printed in Amsterdam and brought over on a beer-ship or perhaps a waffle-barge. Every so often the tent-flaps would part, and Gomer, or one of the taciturn, pipe-smoking Dutchmen in the corners, would peer out and thrust a brick of hand-bills through the gap. 'Whaat doo Belgian waffles and the cleavages of those girls haave in common?' said the Dutch Ambassador; for it was none other. He dabbed butter from his lips with a napkin. He was blond, and pyramidal, as if he consumed a lot of beer and waffles. 'I saaw you staaring at them,' he added, apologetically. 'I haven't the merest idea – sir!' 'Negateev Spaace,' the Dutch Ambassador intoned, letting those double vowels resonate as only a heavyweight Dutchman could. 'Have you heard of thees? It is an aart woord. Wee know about negateev spaace because we like peectures soo muuch. ' 'Is it anything like negative numbers?' 'Eet ees the spaace between twoo theengs,' said the other, and put his hands on his chest and forced his pectorals together to create a poor impression of cleavage. Daniel watched with polite incredulity, and tried not to shudder. The Dutchman plucked a fresh waffle off a plate and held it up by one corner, like a rag soaked with something unpleasant. 'Likewise – the waffle of Belgium is shaaped and defiined, not by its own essential naatuure, but by the hot plaates of haard iron that encloose it on toop and boottom.' 'Oh, I see – you're making a point about the Spanish Netherlands!' The Dutch Ambassador rolled his eyes and tossed the waffle back over his shoulder – before it struck the ground, a stout, disconcertingly monkey-like dog sprang into the air and snatched it, and began to masticate it – literally – for the sound it made was like a homunculus squatting on the floor muttering, 'masticate masticate masticate.' 'Traaped between Fraance and the Dutch Republic, the Spanish Netherlands is raapidly consuumed by Louis the Quatorze Bourbon. Fine. But when Le Roi du Soleil reaches Maestricht he touches – what?' 'The political and military equivalent of a hot iron plate?' The Dutch Ambassador probed negative space with a licked finger, seemed to touch something, and drew back sharply, making a sizzling noise through his teeth. Perhaps by Dutch luck, perhaps by some exquisite sense of timing, Daniel felt the atmosphere socking him in the gut. The tent clenched inwards, then inflated. Waffle-irons chattered and buzzed in the dimness, like skeletons' teeth. The monkey-dog scurried under the table. Gomer Bolstrood pulled back a tent-flap to provide a clear view to the top of the demilune-work, which had been ruptured by detonation of a vast internal store of gunpowder. It looked like a steaming loaf that had been ripped in half. Resurgent Dutchmen were prancing around on the top, trampling and burning those French and English flags. The spectators were on the brink of riot. Gomer let the tent-flap fall shut again, and Daniel turned his attention back to the ambassador, who had never taken his gaze off of Daniel. 'Maybe Fraance taakes Maestricht – but not so easily – they lose the hero D'Artagnan. The war will be won by us, however.' 'I am pleased to know that you will have success in Holland – now will you consider changing your tactics in London?' Daniel said this loudly so that Gomer could share in it. 'In whaat waay?' 'You know what L'Estrange has been doing.' 'I know what L'Estrange has been failing to do!' the Dutch Ambassador chortled. 'Wilkins is trying to make London like Amsterdam – and I'm not speaking of wooden shoes.' 'Many churches – no established religion.' 'It is his life's work. He has given up on Natural Philosophy, these last years, to direct all of his energies toward that goal. He wants it because it is best for England – but the High Anglicans and Crypto-Catholics at Court are against anything that smacks of Dissidents. So Wilkins's task is difficult enough – but when those same Dissidents are linked, in the public mind, with the Dutch enemy, how can he hope for success?' 'In a year – when the dead are counted, and the true costs of the war are understood – Wilkins's task will be too easy.' 'In a year Wilkins will be dead of the stone. Unless he has it cut out.' 'I can recommend a chirurgeon-barber, very speedy with the knife – ' 'He does not feel that he can devote several months to recovery, when the pressure is so immediate and the stakes so high. He is just on the verge of success, Mr. Ambassador, and if you would let up – ' 'We will let up when the French do,' the Ambassador said, and waved at Gomer, who pulled the flap open again to show the demilune being re-conquered by French and English troops, led by Monmouth. To one side, 'D'Artagnan' lay wounded in a gap in the wall. John Churchill was supporting the old musketeer's head in his lap, feeding him sips from a flask. The tent-flap remained open for rather a long time, and Daniel eventually understood that he was being shown the door. As he walked out he caught Gomer's elbow and drew him outside onto the dirt street. 'Brother Gomer,' he said, 'the Dutch are deranged. Understandably. But our situation is not so desperate.' 'On the contrary,' said Gomer, 'I say that you are in desperate peril, Brother Daniel.' Anyone else would have meant physical peril by that, but Daniel had spent enough of his life around Gomer's – which was to say, Daniel's – ilk to know that Gomer meant the spiritual kind. 'I don't suppose that's just because I was staring at a pretty girl's bosom just now – ?' Gomer did not much fancy the jest. Indeed, Daniel sensed before those words were out of his mouth that they would only confirm Gomer's opinion of him as Fallen, or at best, Falling fast. He tried something else: 'Your own father is Secretary of State!' 'Then go and speak to my father.' 'The point I am making is that there is no harm – or peril, if that is what you want to call it – in employing tactics. Cromwell used tactics to win battles, did he not? It did not mean he lacked faith. On the contrary – notto use the brains God gave you, and making every struggle into a frontal charge, is sinful – thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God!' 'Wilkins has the stone,' Gomer said. 'Whether 'twas placed in his bladder by God, or the Devil, is a question for Jesuits. Anyway, he has it, and shall likely die of it, unless you and your Fellows can gin up a way to transmute it into some watery form that can be pissed out. In dread of his death, you have wrought in your mind this phant'sy that if I, Gomer Bolstrood, leave off distributing handbills in the streets of London, it shall set in motion a lengthy chain of consequences that shall somehow end in Wilkins's suffering some chirurgeon to cut him for the stone, him surviving the operation, and living happily ever after, as the kind father you never had. And you say that the Dutch are deranged?' Daniel could not answer. The discourse of Gomer had struck him in the face with no less heat, force, and dumbfounding pain than the branding iron had Gomer's. 'As you phant'sy yourself a master of tactics, consider this whorish spectacle we have been witnessing.' Gomer waved at the demilune-work. Up on the parapet, Monmouth was planting the French and English flags anew, to the cheers of the spectators, who broke into a lusty chorus of 'Pikes on the Dikes' even as 'D'Artagnan' breathed his last. John Churchill carried him down the slope of the earthwork in his arms and laid him on a litter where his body was bedecked with flowers. 'Behold the martyr!' Gomer brayed. 'Who gave his life for the cause, and is fondly remembered by all the Quality! Now there is a tactic for you. I am sorry Wilkins is sick. I would not put him in harm's way on any account, for he was a friend to us. But it is not in my power to keep Death from his door. And when Death does come, ‘twill make of him a Martyr – not so romantick as D'Artagnan perhaps – but of more effect in a better cause. Beg your pardon, Brother Daniel.' Gomer stalked away, tearing open the wrapper on a sheaf of libels. 'D'Artagnan' was being carried along the front of the bleachers in a cortege of gorgeously mussed and tousled Cavaliers, and spectators were doing business with roving flower-girls and showering bouquets and blossoms on those heroes living and 'dead.' But even as petals were fluttering down on the mock-Musketeer, Daniel Waterhouse found slips of paper coming down all around him, carried on a breeze from the bleachers. He slapped one out of the air and was greeted with a cartoon of several French cavaliers gang-raping a Dutch milkmaid. Another showed a cravated musketeer, silhouetted in the light of a burning Protestant church, about to catch a tossed baby on the point of his sword. All around Daniel, and up in the stands, spectators were passing these bills hand-to-hand, sometimes wadding them into sleeves or pockets. So the matter was complicated. And it only become more so ten minutes later, when, during a bombardment of 'Maestricht,' a cannon burst in full view of all spectators. Most people assumed it was just a stage-trick until bloody fragments of artillerymen began to shower down all among them, mingling with the continual flurry of handbills. Daniel walked back to Gresham's College and worked all night with Hooke. Hooke stayed below, gazing up at various stars, and Daniel remained on the roof, looking at a nova that was flaring in the west end of London: a Mobb of people with torches, milling around St. James's Fields and discharging the occasional musket. Later, he learned that they had attacked Comstock House, supposedly because they were furious about the cannon that had burst. John Comstock himself showed up at Gresham's College the next morning. It took several moments for Daniel to recognize him, so altered was his countenance by shock, by outrage, and even by shame. He demanded that Hooke and the rest drop what they were doing and investigate the remnants of the burst cannon, which he insisted had been tampered with in some way 'by mine enemies.' College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, Cambridge 1672 There are few things, that are incapable of being represented by a fiction. – HOBBES, Leviathan Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) Once More into the Breeches A COMEDY DRAMATIS PERSONAE MEN: MR. VAN UNDERDEVATER , a Dutchman, founder of a great commercial empire in sow's-ears and potatoes'-eyes NZINGA , a cannibal Neeger, formerly King of the Congo, now house-slave to Mr. van Underdevater JEHOSHAPHAT STOPCOCK , the Earl of BRIMSTONE, an enthusiast TOM RUNAGATE , a discharged soldier turned Vagabond THE REV. YAHWEH PUCKER , a Dissident divine EUGENE STOPCOCK , son of Lord Brimstone, a Captain of Foot FRANCIS BUGGERMY , Earl of Suckmire, a foppish courtier DODGE AND BOLT , two of Tom Runagate's accomplices WOMEN: MISS LYDIA VAN UNDERDEVATER , the daughter and sole heiress of Mr. van Underdevater, recently returned from a Venetian finishing-school LADY BRIMSTONE , wife to Jehoshaphat Stopcock MISS STRADDLE , Tom Runagate's companion SCENE: SUCKMIRE , a rural estate in Kent ACT I. SCENE I. SCENE: a Cabin in a Ship at Sea. Thunder heard, flashes of Lightning seen. Enter Mr. van Underdevater in dressing-gown, with a lanthorn. VAN UND : Boatswain! Enter Nzinga wet, with a Sack. NZINGA: Here, master, what – VAN UND : Odd's bodkins! Have you fallen into the tar-pot, boatswain? NZINGA: It is I, Master – your slave, My Royal Majesty, by the Grace of the tree-god, the rock-god, river-god, and diverse other gods who have slipped my mem'ry, of the Congo, King. VAN UND : So it is. What have you in the bag? NZINGA: Balls. VAN UND : Balls! Sink me! You have quite forgot your Civilizing Lessons! NZINGA: Of ice. VAN UND : Thank heavens. NZINGA: I gathered 'em from the deck – where they are falling like grape-shot – and for this you thank heaven? VAN UND : Aye, for it means the boatswain is still in possession of all his Parts. Boatswain! Enter LYDIA in dressing-gown, dishevelled. LYDIA: Dear father, why do you shout for the boatswain so? VAN UND : My dear Lydia, I would fain pay him to bring this infernal storm to an end. LYDIA: But father, the boatswain can't stop a tempest! VAN UND : Perhaps he knows someone who can. NZINGA: I know a weather-god in Guinea who can – and at rates very reasonable, as he will accept payment in rum. VAN UND : Rum! You take me for a half-wit? If this is what the weather-god does when he is sober: NZINGA: Cowrie-shells would do in a pinch. If master would care to despatch My Majesty on the next southbound boat, My Majesty would be pleased to broker the transaction – VAN UND : You prove yourself a shrewd man of commerce. I am reminded of when I traded the holes in a million cannibals' ears, for the eyes of a million potatoes, and beat the market at both ends of the deal – More thunder. VAN UND : Too, slow, too slow! Boatswain! Enter Lord Brimstone. LORD BRIMSTONE: Here, here, what is this bawling? LYDIA: Lord Brimstone – your servant. VAN UND : The price of ending this tempest is too high, the market in Pagan Deities too remote – LORD B: Then why, sir, do you call for the boatswain? VAN UND : Why, sir, to tell him to be of good courage and to remain firm in the face of danger. LYDIA: Oh, too late, father! VAN UND : What mean you, child? LYDIA: When the boatswain heard you, he lost what firmness he had, and fled in a panic. VAN UND : How do you know it? LYDIA: Why, he upset the hammock altogether, and tumbled me onto the deck! VAN UND : Lydia, Lydia, I have spent a fortune sending you to that school in Venice, where you have been studying to become a virtuous maiden – LYDIA: And I have studied hard, Father, but it is ever so difficult! VAN UND : Has all that money been wasted? LYDIA: Oh, no, Father, I learned some lovely songs from our dancing-master, Signore Fellatio. Sings.* VAN UND : I've heard enough – Boatswain! Enter Lady Brimstone. LADY BRIMSTONE: My lord, have you found who is making that dreadful noise yet? LORD B: M'lady, it's that Dutchman . LADY B: So much for idle investigations:what have you done about it, my lord? LORD B: Nothing, my lady, for they say that the only way to quiet one of these obstreperous Dutchmen is to drown him. LADY B: Drown – why, my lord – you're not thinking of throwing him overboard – ? LORD B: Every soul aboard is thinking of it, M'lady. But with a Dutchman it isn't necessary, as they live below sea-level to begin with. 'Tis merely a question of getting the sea to go back where the Good Lord put it in the first place – LADY B: And how d'you propose to effect that, my lord? LORD B: I have been conducting experiments on a novel engine to make windmills turn backwards, and pump water down-hill: LADY B: Experiments! Engines! I say the way to put Dutchmen under water's with French gunpowder and English courage! Whatever the actor playing Lord Brimstone said was like expectorating into the River Amazon. For the true SCENE of these events was Neville's Court*on a spring evening, and the true Dramatis Personae a roll that would've consumed many yards of paper and drams of ink to set it out fully. The script was an unpublished masterwork of courtly and collegiate intrigue, comprising hundreds of more or less clever lines being delivered – mostly sotto voce:at the same instant, producing a contrapuntal effect quite intricate but entirely too much for young Daniel Waterhouse to grasp. He had been wondering why persons such as these bothered to go to plays at all, when every day at Whitehall provided more spectacle – now he sensed that they did so because the stories in the theatre were simple, and arrived at fixed conclusions after an hour or two. Heading up the cast of tonight's performance was King Charles II of England, situated on the upper floor of Trinity's miserable wreck of a library, where several consecutive windows had been opened up and converted into temporary opera-boxes. The Queen, one Catherine of Braganza, a Portuguese princess with a famously inoperative womb, was seated to one side of His Majesty, pretending to understand English as usual. The guest of honor, the Duke of Monmouth (King Charles's son by his mistress Lucy Walter), was on the other side. The windows flanking the King's contained various elements of his court: one was anchored by Louise de Kéroualle, the Duchess of Portsmouth and the King's mistress. Another by Barbara Villiers, a.k.a. Lady Castlemaine, a.k.a. the Duchess of Cleveland, former lover of John Churchill, and the King's mistress. Moving outwards from the three central windows, there was one all filled up with Angleseys: Thomas More Anglesey and his nearly indistinguishable sons, Philip, now something like twenty-seven years old, and Louis, who was twenty-four, but looking younger. For protocol dictated that, as the Earl of Upnor was visiting his alma mater , he had to wear academic robes. Though he'd mobilized a squadron of French tailors to liven them up, they were still academic robes, and the object infesting his wig was unmistakably a mortarboard. Balancing this Anglesey-window was a window all crowded with Comstocks, specifically the so-called Silver branch of that race: John and his sons Richard and Charles foremost, all dressed likewise in robes and mortarboards. Unlike the Earl of Upnor they seemed comfortable dressed that way. Or at least had until the play had begun, and the character of Jehoshaphat Stopcock, Lord Brimstone, had come tottering out dressed precisely as they were. The King's Comedians, performing on a temporary stage that had been erected in Neville's Court, had decided to plow onwards in spite of the fact that no one could hear a word they were saying. 'Lord Brimstone' seemed to be upbraiding his wife about something – presumably, her reference to 'French gunpowder,' as opposed to 'English,' which, on some other planet, might have been a rhetorical figure, but here seemed very much like a stab at John Comstock. Meanwhile, most of the audience – who, if they had the good fortune to be seated, were seated on chairs and benches arranged in the corner of Neville's Court, beneath the windows of King and Court – were trying to break out into the opening stanza of 'Pikes on the Dikes,' the most widely plagiarized song in England: a rousing ditty about why it was an excellent idea to invade Holland. But the King held out one hand to silence them. Not that he was lacking in belligerence – but down on the stage, 'Lydia van Underdevater' was delivering a line that looked like it was meant to be funny. And the King didn't like it when the buzz of Intrigue drowned out his Mistress. All of the Comedians suddenly fell down, albeit in dramatickal and actorly ways – and that went double for Nell Gwyn, who wound up draped over a bench with one arm stretched out gracefully, displaying about a square yard of flawless pale armpits and bosoms. The audience were poleaxed. The long-called-for boatswain finally ran in and announced that the ship had run aground in sands just off Castle Suckmire. 'Lord Brimstone' sent Nzinga out to fetch his trunk, which arrived with the immediacy that can only happen in stage-plays. The owner pawed through its contents, spilling out a strange mixture of drab out-moded clothing and peculiar equipment, viz. retorts, crucibles, skulls, and microscopes. Meanwhile Lydia was picking up certain of his garments, such as farmers' breeches and cowherds' boots, holding them at arm's length and mugging. Finally, Lord Brimstone stood up, tucking a powder-keg under one arm, and slapping a frayed and bent mortarboard onto his head. LORD B: What's wanted to move this ship is Gunpowder! Among the groundlings in their chairs and on the grass, much uneasy shifting and muttering, and tassels flopping this way and that, as mortarboard-wearing scholars turned to each other to enquire as to just who was being made fun of here, or shook their heads, or bowed them low to pray for the souls of the King's Comedians, and of whomever had written this play, and of the King who'd insisted he couldn't make it through a one-night stand at Cambridge without being entertained. Very different reactions, though, from the windows-cum-opera-boxes: the Duchess of Portsmouth was undone. Her bosom was heaving like a spritsail gone all a-luff, her head was thrown back to expose a whole lot of jewelled throat. These spectacles had already caused diverse groundling scholars to fall out of their chairs. She was being supported by a pair of young blades in huge curled and beribboned wigs, who were wiping tears of mirth away from their eyes with the fingertips of their kid gloves – having already donated their lace hankies to the Duchess. Meanwhile, mortarboard-wearing gunpowder magnate John Comstock – who'd long opposed the Duchess of Portsmouth's efforts to introduce French fashions to the English court – was managing a thin, oddly distracted smile. The King – who, until tonight anyway, had generally sided with Comstock – was smiling, and the Angleseys were all having the times of their lives. An elbow to the kidney forced Daniel to stop gaping at the Duchess's efforts to rupture her bodice, and to pay some attention to the rather homelier sight of Oldenburg, who was seated next to him. The hefty German had been released from the Tower as suddenly and as inexplicably as he'd been clapped into it. He glanced down toward the far end of Neville's Court, then frowned at Daniel and said, 'Where is he? Or at least it! ' meaning Isaac Newton and his paper on tangents, respectively. Then Oldenburg turned the other way and peeked up round the edge of his mortarboard toward the Angleseys' box, where Louis Anglesey, the Earl of Upnor, had somehow gotten his merriment under control and was giving Oldenburg a Significant Glare. Daniel was glad to have a pretext for leaving. All through the play he had been trying and trying to suspend his disbelief, but the damned thing just wouldn't suspend. He rose to his feet, bunched his robes up, and sidestepped down a row of chairs, treading on diverse Royal Society feet. Sir Winston Churchill: Cheers on your boy's Maestricht work, old chap. Christopher Wren: Let's get that cathedral up, what, no dilly-dallying! Sir Robert Moray: Let's have lunch and talk about eels. Thank God Hooke had had the temerity to not show up – too busy rebuilding London – so Daniel didn't have to step on any of his parts. Finally, Daniel was out on open grass. This was really a job for John Wilkins – but the Bishop of Chester was lying on his bed down in London, ill of the stone. Working his way round back of the stage, Daniel found himself among several wagons that had been used to haul dramaturgickal mysteries up from London. Awnings had been rigged to them and tents pitched in between, so tent-ropes were stretched across the darkness, thick as ship's rigging, and hitched round splintery wooden stakes piercing the (until the actors had shown up, anyway) flawless lawn. Various items of what he could only assume were ladies' undergarments (they were definitely garments , but he had never seen their like – Q.E.D.) dangled from the ropes and occasionally surprised the hell out of him by pawing clammily at his face. Daniel had to plot a devious course, then pursue it slowly, to escape the tangle. So it was really – really – just an accident that he found the two actresses, doing whatever the hell it was that females do when they excuse themselves and exchange warm knowing looks and go off in pairs. He caught the very end of it: 'What should I do w'th'old one?' said a young lady with a lovely voice, and an accent from some part of England with too many sheep. 'Fling it into the crowd – start a riot,' suggested the other – an Irish girl. This touched off fiendish whooping. Clearly no one had taught these girls how to titter. 'But they wouldn't even know what it was,' said the girl with the lovely voice, 'we are the first women to set foot in this place.' 'Then neither will they know if you leave it where it lies,' the Irish girl answered. The other now dropped her rural accent and began talking exactly like a Cambridge scholar from a good family. 'I say, what's this in the middle of my bowling-green? It would appear to be . . . fox-bait!' More whooping – cut short by a man's voice out of a backstage caravan: 'Tess – save some of that for the King – you're wanted on the stage.' The lasses picked up their skirts and exeunted. Daniel glimpsed them as they transited across a gap between tents, and recognized the one called Tess from the 'Siege of Maestricht.' She was the one he had taken for a Frenchwoman, simply because he'd heard her talking that way. He now understood that she was really an Englishwoman who could talk any way she pleased. This might have been obvious, since she was a professional actress; but it was new to him, and it made her interesting. Daniel emerged from behind the tent where he'd been (it is fair to say) lurking, and – purely in a spirit of philosophical inquiry – approached the spot where Tess of the beautiful voice and many accents had been (fair to say) squatting. In a sort of hod projecting above the stage, more gunpowder was lit off in an attempt to simulate lightning, and it made a pool of yellow light in front of Daniel for just a moment. Neatly centered in a patch of grass – grass that was almost phosphorus-green, this being Spring – was a wadded-up rag, steaming from the warmth of Tess, bright with blood. Of sooty coal the Empiric Alchimist Can turn, or holds it possible to turn Metals of drossiest Ore to perfet Gold As from the Mine. – MILTON, Paradise Lost IT HAD BEEN A FULL DAY for the King. Or perhaps Daniel was being naïve to think so – more likely, it was a typical day for the King, and the only persons feeling exhausted were the Cantabrigians who had been trying to maintain the pretense that they could keep up with him. The entourage had appeared on the southern horizon in mid-morning, looking (Daniel supposed) quite a bit like the invasion that Louis XIV had recently flung into the Dutch Republic: meaning that it thundered and threw up dust-clouds and consumed oats and generated ramparts of manure like any Regiment, but its wagons were all gilded, its warriors were armed with jewelled Italian rapiers, its field-marshalls wore skirts and commanded men, or condemned them, with looks – this fell upon Cambridge, anyway, with more effect than King Louis had achieved, so far, in the Netherlands. The town was undone, dissolved. Bosoms everywhere, bare-assed courtiers spilling out of windows, the good Cambridge smell of fens and grass overcome by perfumes, not just of Paris but of Araby and Rajasthan. The King had abandoned his coach and marched through the streets of the town accepting the cheers of the scholars of Cambridge, who had formed up in front of their several Colleges, robed and arranged by ranks and degrees, like soldiers drawn up for review. He'd been officially greeted by the outgoing Chancellor, who had presented him with a colossal Bible – they said it was possible to see the royal nose wrinkling, and the eyes rolling, from half a mile away. Later the King (and his pack of demented spaniels) had dined at High Table in the College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, under the big Holbein portrait of the college's Founder, King Henry VIII. As Fellows, Daniel and Isaac were accustomed to sitting at High Table, but the town was now stuffed with persons who ranked them, and so they'd been demoted halfway across the room: Isaac in his scarlet robes talking to Boyle and Locke about something, and Daniel shoved off in a corner with several vicars who – in violation of certain Biblical guidelines – plainly did not love one another. Daniel tried to stanch their disputatious drone and to pick up a few snatches of conversation from the High Table. The King had a lot to say about Henry VIII, all of it apparently rather droll. At first, it was Old Hank's approach to polygamy: so ham-handed it was funny. All of it was veiled in royal wit, of course – he didn't come right out and say anything really, but the point seemed to be: why do people call me a libertine? At least I don't chop their heads off. If Daniel (or any other scholar in this place) had wanted to die instantly, he could have stood up at this point and hollered, 'Well, at least he eventually got round to producing a legitimate male heir!' but this did not occur. Several goblets later, the King moved on to some reflections on what a fine and magnificent and (not to put too fine a point on it) rich place Trinity College was, and how remarkable it was that such results could have been achieved by Henry VIII merely by defying the Pope, and sacking a few monasteries. So perhaps the coffers of Puritans, Quakers, Barkers, and Presbyterians might go, one day, towards building an even finer College! This was said as a jest, of course – he went on to say that of course he was speaking of voluntary contributions. Even so, it made the Dissenters in the room very angry – but (as Daniel later reflected) no more angry, really, than they'd been before. And it was a masterly bit of Catholic-bashing. In other words, all nicely calculated to warm the hearts and ease the fears of all the High Anglicans (such as John Comstock) in the hall. The King had to do a lot of that, because many assumed he was soft on Catholics, and some even thought he was one. In other words, maybe he had just seen a little slice of Court politics as usual, and nothing of consequence had happened. But since John Wilkins had lost the ability to urinate, Daniel's job was to pay attention and report all of this to him later. Then it was off to the chapel where the Duke of Monmouth, now a war hero as well as a renowned scholar and bastard, was installed as Chancellor of the University. After that, finally, the Comedy in Neville's Court. DANIEL PAUSED IN THE CENTER of a Gothic arch and looked out over a spread of stone steps that led down into the Great Court of Trinity College: an area about four times the size of Neville's Court. In a strange way it reminded him of the ‘Change in London, except that where the ‘Change was a daytime place, all a-sparkle with Thomas Gresham's golden grasshoppers and vaulting Mercurys, and crowded with lusty shouting traders, this place was Gothickal in the extreme, faintly dusted with the blue light of a half-moon, sparsely populated by robed and/or big-wigged men skulking about the paths and huddling in doorways in groups of two or three. And whereas the ‘Change-men made common cause to buy shares in sailing-ships or joint stock companies, and traded Jamaica sugar for Spanish silver, these men were transacting diverse small conspiracies or trading snatches of courtly data. The coming of Court to Cambridge was like Stourbridge Fair – an occasional opportunity for certain types of business, most of which was in some sense occult. He couldn't get in any trouble simply walking direct across the Great Court to the Gate. As a Fellow, he was allowed to tread on the grass. Most of these lurkers and strollers weren't. Not that they cared about the College's pedantic rules, but they preferred shadowy edges, having the courtier's natural affinity for joints and crevices. Across broad open space Daniel strode, so that no one could accuse him of eavesdropping. A line stretched from where he'd come in, to the Gate, would pass direct through a sort of gazebo in the center of the Great Court: an octagonal structure surmounting a little pile of steps, with a goblet-shaped fountain in the middle. Moonlight slanted in among the pillars and gave it a ghastly look – the stone pale as a dead man's flesh, streaked with rivulets of blood, pulsing from arterial punctures. Daniel reckoned it had to be some sort of Papist-style Vision, and was just about to lift up his hands to inspect them for Stigmata when he caught a whiff, and recollected that the fountain had been drained of water and filled with claret wine in honor of the King and of the new Chancellor: a decision that begged to be argued with. But no accounting for taste . . . 'The Africans cannot propagate, ' said a familiar voice, startlingly close. 'What do you mean? They can do so as well as anyone,' said a different familiar voice. 'Perhaps better !' 'Not without Neeger women .' 'You don't say!' 'You must remember that the planters are short-sighted. They're all desperate to get out of Jamaica – they wake up every day expecting to find themselves, or their children, in the grip of some tropical fever. To import female Neegers would cost nearly as much as to import males, but the females cannot produce as much sugar – particularly when they are breeding.' Daniel had finally recognized this voice as belonging to Sir Richard Apthorp – the second A in the CABAL. 'So they don't import females at all ?' 'That is correct, sir. And a newly arrived male is only usable for a few years,' Apthorp said. 'That explains much of the caterwauling that has been emanating lately from the ‘Change.' The two men had been sitting together on the steps of the fountain, facing toward the Gate, and Daniel hadn't seen them until he'd drawn close enough to hear them. He was just getting ready to shift direction, and swing wide around the fountain, when the man who wasn't Sir Richard Apthorp stood up, turned around, and dipped a goblet into the fountain – and caught sight of Daniel standing there flat-footed. Now Daniel recognized him – he was only too easy to recognize in a dark Trinity courtyard with blood on his hands. 'I say!' Jeffreys exclaimed, 'is that a new statue over there? A Puritan saint? Oh, I'm wrong, it is moving now – what appeared to be a Pillar of Virtue, is revealed as Daniel Waterhouse – ever the keen observer – now making an empiric study of us. Don't worry, Sir Richard, Mr. Waterhouse sees all and does nothing – a model Royal Society man.' 'Good evening, Mr. Waterhouse,' Apthorp said, managing to convey, by the tone of his voice, that he found Jeffreys embarrassing and tedious. 'Mr. Jeffreys. Sir Richard. God save the King.' 'The King!' Jeffreys repeated, raising his dripping goblet and then taking a swallow. 'Stand and deliver like a good little scholar, Mr. Waterhouse. Why are Sir Richard's friends in the ‘Change making such a fuss?' 'Admiral de Ruyter sailed down to Guinea and took away all of the Duke of York's slave-ports,' Daniel said. Jeffreys – one hand half-covering his mouth, and speaking in a stage-whisper: 'Which the Duke of York had stolen from the Dutch, a few years before – but in Africa, who splits hairs?' 'During the years that the Duke's company controlled Guinea, many slaves were shipped to Jamaica – there they made sugar – fortunes were built, and will endure, as long as the attrition of slaves is replaced by new shipments. But the Dutch have now choked off the supply – so I'd guess that Sir Richard's clients at the ‘Change can read the implications clearly enough – there must be some turmoil in the commodities markets.' Like a victim of unprovoked Battery looking for witnesses, Jeffreys turned toward Apthorp, who raised his eyebrows and nodded. Now Jeffreys had been a London barrister for some years. Daniel suspected that he knew of these events only as a mysterious influence that caused his clients to go bankrupt. 'Some turmoil,' Jeffreys said, in a dramatic whisper. 'Rather dry language, isn't it? Imagine some planter's family in Jamaica, watching the work-force, and the harvest, dwindle – trying to stay one step ahead of bankruptcy, yellow fever, and slave rebellion – scanning the horizon for sails, praying for the ships that will be their salvation – some turmoil, you call it?' Daniel could have said, Imagine a barrister watching his moneybags dwindle as he drinks them away, scanning the Strand for a client who's got the wherewithal to pay his legal bills . . . but Jeffreys was wearing a sword and was drunk. So he said: 'If those planters are in church, and praying, then they've already found salvation. Good evening, gentlemen.' He headed for the Gate, swinging wide round the fountain so that Jeffreys wouldn't be tempted to run him through. Sir Richard Apthorp was applauding him politely. Jeffreys was mumbling and growling, but after a few moments he was able to get words out: 'You are the same man as you were – or weren't:ten years ago, Daniel Waterhouse! You were ruled by fear then:and you'd have England ruled by it now ! Thank God you are sequestered within these walls, and unable to infect London with your disgusting pusillanimity!' And more in that vein, until Daniel ducked into the vault of the Great Gate of Trinity College. The gate was a hefty structure with crenellated towers at its four corners: a sort of mock-fortress, just the thing for retreating into when under attack by a Jeffreys. Between it and the side-wall of Trinity's shotgun chapel was a gap in the College's perimeter defenses about a stone's throw wide, patched with a suite of chambers that had a little walled garden in front of it, on the side facing towards the town. These chambers had been used to shield various Fellows from the elements over the years, but lately Daniel Waterhouse and Isaac Newton had been living there. Once those two bachelors had moved in their miserable stock of furniture, there had been plenty of unused space remaining, and so it had become the world's leading alchemical research facility. Daniel knew this, because he had helped build it – was helpingbuild it, rather, for it was perpetually under construction. Entering his home, Daniel pulled his robes close to his body so that they would not catch fire brushing against the glowing dome of the Reverberatory Furnace, wherein flames curled against the ceiling to strike downwards against the target. Then he pulled his skirts up so they wouldn't drag against the heap of coal that (though the room was dark) he knew would be piled on the floor to his right. Or, for that matter, the mound of horse dung on the left (when burnt, it made a gentle moist heat). He maneuvered down a narrow lead among stacks of wooden crates, an egglike flask of quicksilver packed into each one, and came round a corner into another room. This chamber looked like a miniature city, built by outlandish stone-masons, and just in the act of burning down – for each 'building' had a peculiar shape, to draw in the air, channel flame, and carry away fumes in a particular way, and each one was filled with flames. Some of them smoked; some steamed; most gave off queer-smelling vapors. Rather than explaining what the place smelled like, ‘twere easier to list what few things could not be smelled here. Lumps of gold lay out on tabletops, like butter in a pastry-shop – it being de rigueur among the higher sort of Alchemists to show a fashionable contempt for gold, as a way of countering the accusation that they were only in it for the money. Not all operations demanded a furnace, and so there were tables, too, sheathed in peened copper, supporting oil-lamps that painted the round bottoms of flasks and retorts with yellow flame. Smudged faces turned towards Daniel, sequins of perspiration tumbled from drooping eyebrows. He immediately recognized Robert Boyle and John Locke, Fellows of the Royal Society, but, too, there were certain gentlemen who tended to show up at their garden-gate at perverse hours, robed and hooded – as if they really needed to conceal their identities when the King himself was practicing the Art at Whitehall. Viewing their petulant faces by fire-light, Daniel wished they'd kept the hoods on. For, alas, they weren't Babylonian sorcerers or Jesuit warrior-priests or Druidic warlocks after all, but an unmatched set of small-town apothecaries, bored noblemen, and crack-pated geezers, with faces that were either too slack or too spasmodical. One of them was markedly young – Daniel recognized him as Roger Comstock, he of the so-called Golden Comstocks, who'd been a scholar along with Daniel, Isaac, Upnor, Monmouth, and Jeffreys. Isaac had put Roger Comstock to work pumping a bellows, and the strain was showing on his face, but he was not about to complain. Too, there was a small and very trim raptor-faced man with white hair. Daniel recognized him as Monsieur LeFebure, the King's Chymist, who'd introduced John Comstock and Thomas More Anglesey and others – including the King himself – to the Art, when they'd been exiled in St.-Germain during the Cromwell years. But all of these were satellites, or (like Jupiter's moons) satellites of satellites. The Sun stood at a writing-desk in the center of the room, quill in hand, calmly making notations in a large, stained, yellowed Book. He was dressed in a long splotched smock with several holes burnt through it, though the hem of a scarlet robe could be seen hanging beneath. His head was encased in a sort of leather sack with a windowpane let into it so that he could see out. Where Daniel stood, that rectangle of glass happened to be reflecting an open furnace-door, so instead of the bulging eyes, he saw a brilliant sheet of streaming flame. A breathing-tube, comprising segments of hollow cane plumbed together by the small intestine of some beast, was sewn through the bag. Isaac had tossed it back over his shoulder. It dangled down his back and ran across the floor to Roger Comstock, who pumped fresh air into it with a bellows. So they must be doing something with mercury this evening. Isaac had observed that quicksilver, absorbed into his body, produced effects like those of coffee or tobacco, only more so, and so he used the breathing apparatus whenever he had begun to feel especially twitchy. The results of some experiment appeared to be cooling down on one of the tables – a crucible hanging in darkness giving off a sullen glow, like Mars – and Daniel reckoned it was as good a time as any to interrupt. He stepped into the middle of the room and held up the bloody rag. 'The menstruum of a human female,' he announced, 'only a few minutes old!' A bit melodramatic. But these men thrived on it. Why else would they conceal their persons in wizard-cloaks, and their knowledge in occult signs? Some of them, anyway, were deeply impressed. Newton turned round and glared significantly at Roger Comstock, who cringed and gave the bellows several brisk strokes. The sack around Isaac's head bulged and whistled. Isaac glared some more. One of the minions rushed up with a beaker. Daniel dropped the moist rag into it. Monsieur LeFebure approached and began to make calm observations in a fifty-fifty French-Latin mix. Boyle and Locke listened politely, the lesser Alchemists formed up in an outer circle, faces strained with the effort of decrypting whatever the King's Chymist was saying. Daniel turned the other way to see Isaac peeling the wet sack off his head, then gathering his silver hair and holding it atop his skull to let the back of his neck cool down. He was gazing back at Daniel with no particular emotion. Of course he knew that the rag was just a diversionary tactic, but this did not affect him one way or the other. 'There's still time to see the second act of the play,' Daniel said. 'We're holding an empty seat for you – practically had to use muskets and pikes to keep scheming Londoners from it.' 'You are taking the position, then, that God placed me on the earth, and in His wisdom supplied me with the resources that He has, so that I could interrupt my work, and spend my hours, watching a wicked atheistical play?' 'Of course not, Isaac, please don't impute such things to me, not even in private.' They were withdrawing to another room – which, therefore, in a more dignified sort of house would be called the w'drawing room – but here it was a workshop, the floor slick with wood-dust and shavings from a lathe, and a-crackle with failures from the glass-blowing bench, and cluttered with various hand-tools that they'd used to construct everything else. Isaac said nothing, only gazed at Daniel, all patient expectation. 'From time to time – perhaps once a day – I prevail upon you to eat something,' Daniel pointed out. 'Does this mean I believe God put you here to stuff food into your mouth? Of course not. But in order for you to accomplish the work that you, and I, believe God shaped you for, you must put food into your body.' 'Is it really your belief that watching Once More into the Breeches is comparable to eating?' 'To work, you require certain resources – nutrition is only one. A stipend, a workshop, tools, equipment – how do you get them ?' 'Behold!' Isaac said, sweeping one arm over his empire of tools and furnaces. This caused the cuff of his robe to fly out from under his smock – catching sight of it, he grasped the smock's sleeve with the other hand and yanked it back to reveal the scarlet raiment of the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics. Coming from any other man this would have seemed dramatic and insufferably pompous, but from Isaac it was the simplest and most concise answer to Daniel's question. 'The Fellowship – the chambers – the laboratory – and the Lucasian Chair – all the best that you could hope for. You have all you need – for now. But how did you get those things, Isaac?' 'Providence.' 'By which you mean Divine Providence. But how – ' 'You wish to examine the workings of God's will in the world? I am pleased to hear it. For that is my sole endeavour. You are keeping me from it – let us go back into the other room and pursue an answer to your question together.' 'By diverting your attention from those crucibles – for a few hours – you could gain a clearer understanding of, and a more profound gratitude for, what Providence has given you.' Devising that sentence had required intense concentration on Daniel's part – he was gratified when it seemed to at least confuse Isaac. 'If there are some data I have overlooked, by all means edify me,' Isaac said. 'Recall the Fellowship competition of several years ago. You'd been busy doing the work God put you here to do – instead ofthe work that Trinity College expected of you – consequently, your prospects seemed bleak – wouldn't you agree?' 'I have always placed my faith in – ' 'In God, of course. But don't tell me you weren't worried you'd be sent packing, and live out your days as a gentleman farmer in Woolsthorpe. There were other candidates. Men who'd curried favor in the right places, and memorized all of the medieval claptrap we were expected to know. Do you remember, Isaac, what became of your competitors?' 'One went insane,' Isaac recited like a bored scholar. 'One passed out in a field from too much drink, caught a fever, and died. One fell down stairs drunk and had to withdraw because of injuries suffered. The fourth – ' Here Isaac faltered, which was a rare event for him. Daniel seized the moment by stepping closer and adopting a curious and innocent look. Isaac looked away and said, 'The fourth one also fell down stairs drunk and had to withdraw! Now, Daniel, if you're trying to say that this was incredibly improbable, and fortunate for me, I have already given you my answer: Providence.' 'But in what form did Providence exert itself? Some mysterious action at a distance? Or the earthly mechanics of colliding bodies?' 'Now you have quite lost me.' 'Do you believe that God stretched out a finger from Heaven, and knocked those two down the staircase? Or did he put someone on Earth who arranged for these things to happen?' 'Daniel – surely you didn't – ' Daniel laughed. 'Push them down stairs? No. But I think I know who did. You have the wherewithal to work, Isaac, because of certain Powers that Be – which is not to say that Providence isn't working through them. But what it all means is that you must, from time to time, pause in your labors, and spend a few hours maintaining friendly relations with those Powers.' Isaac had been pacing around the chamber during this lecture, and looking generally skeptical. More than one time he opened his mouth to make some objection. But at about the time Daniel finished, Isaac seemed to notice something. Daniel thought it was one of many papers and note-books scattered upon a certain table. Whatever it might have been, the sight of it caused Isaac to reconsider. Isaac's face slackened, as if the internal flame were being banked. He began stripping off his smock. 'Very well,' he said, 'please inform the others.' The others had already squeezed the rag out into a glass retort and were trying to distill from it whatever generative spirit they supposed must be exuded from a woman's womb. Roger Comstock and the other minions looked crestfallen to learn that Professor Newton would be leaving them, but Locke and Boyle and LeFebure took it in stride. Newton made himself presentable very quickly – this being why academics loved robes, and fops loathed them. A contingent of five Royal Society members – Boyle, Locke, LeFebure, Waterhouse, and Newton – set out across the Great Court of Trinity College. All were in long black robes and mortar-boards save Newton, who led the way, a cardinal pursued by a flock of crows, a vivid red mark on the Trinity green. 'IHAVEN'T SEEN THIS PLAY ,' Locke said, 'but I have seen one or two from which the story and characters of this one were . . . uh . . .' Newton: 'Stolen.' Boyle: 'Inspired.' LeFebure: 'Appropriated.' Locke: 'Adapted, and so I can inform you that a ship has run aground in a storm, near a castle, the seat of a foppish courtier probably named something like Percival Kidney or Reginald Mumblesleeve – ' 'Francis Buggermy, according to the Playbill,' Daniel put in. Isaac turned around and glared at him. 'So much the better,' Locke said. 'But of course the fop's in London, never comes to the country – so a Vagabond named Roger Thrust or Judd Vault or – ' 'Tom Runagate.' 'And his mistress, Madeline Cherry or – ' 'Miss Straddle, in this case.' 'Are squatting there. Now, seeing a group of castaways from the ship coming ashore, these two Vagabonds dress up in the fop's clothing and impersonate Francis Buggermy and his mistress-of-the-moment – much to the surprise of a withered Puritan Bible-pounder who comes upon the scene – ' 'The Reverend Yahweh Pucker,' Daniel said. 'The rest we can see for ourselves – ' 'Why's that old fellow all charred black?' Boyle demanded, catching sight of a performer up on the stage. 'He's a Neeger slave,' Daniel said. 'Which reminds me,' Locke put in, 'I need to send a message to my broker – time to sell my stock in the Guinea Company, I fear – ' 'No, no!' Boyle said, 'I mean black as in charred, burnt, with smoke coming out of his hair!' 'No such thing was in the version I saw,' Locke said. 'Oh . . . in an earlier scene, there was a hilarious misadventure, having to do with a keg of gunpowder,' Daniel volunteered. 'Er . . . was this comedy written recently ?' 'Since the . . . um . . . events ?' 'One can only assume,' Daniel said. Significant chin-stroking and hemming now among the various R.S. Fellows (save Newton), who glanced up towards the Earl of Epsom as they made their way to their seats. LYDIA: Is this walking, or swimming? VAN UND : Fine muck – fine hurricanoe – throw up a dike there, and a windmill yonder, and I'll be able to join it to my estates in Flanders. LYDIA: But it isn't yours. VAN UND : Easily remedied – what's the name of the place? LYDIA: That pretty boatswain said we were just off a place called Suckmire. VAN UND : Don't pine for him, Lydia – yonder Castle's sure to house some Persons of Quality – why, I spy some now! Halloo! TOM RUNAGATE: You see, Miss Straddle, they've already marked us as Courtiers. A few stolen rags are as good as Title and Pedigree. MISS STRADDLE: Aye, Tom, true enough when we're barely within bowshot – but what's to come later? TOM ( peering through spyglass): What is to come ? I have spied one candidate – SRADDLE: That lass has breeding, my wayward Tom – she'll scorn you as a Vagabond, when she hears your voice – TOM: I can do a fine accent well as any Lord. SRADDLE: – and observes your uncouth manners. TOM: Don't you know that bad manners are high fashion now? SRADDLE: Stab me! TOM: 'Tis truth! These fine people insult one another all day long – 'Tis called wit! Then they poke at one another with swords, and call it honor. SRADDLE: Then ‘tween Wit and Honor, the treasure on that wrack is as good as ours. VAN UND : Halloo, there, sir! Throw us a line, we are sinking into your garden! TOM: This one must be daft, he mistakes yonder mud-flat for a garden! SRADDLE: Daft, or Delft. TOM: You think he's Dutch!? Then I might levy a rope-climbing toll . . . SRADDLE: What'll his daughter think of you then? TOM: 'Tis well considered . . . Throws rope. LORD BRIMSTONE: Who's that Frenchman on the sea-wall? Has England been conquered? Heaven help us! LADY B: He is no Frenchman, my lord, but a good English gentleman in modern attire – most likely it is Count Suckmire, and that lady is his latest courtesan. LORD B: You don't say! To Miss Straddle.Good day, madam – I'm informed that you are a Cartesian – here stands another! SRADDLE: What's he on about? TOM: Never mind – remember what I told you. Lord B: Cogito, ergo sum! SRADDLE: Air go some? Yes, the air goes some when you flap your jaw, sir – I thought it was a sea-breeze, until I smelled it. To Tom.Is that the sort of thing? TOM: Well played, my flower. LADY B: That whore is most uncivil. LORD B: No need to be vulgar, my dear – it means she recognizes us as her equals. ENTER, from opposite, the Rev. Yahweh Pucker, with BIBLE and SHOVEL. PUCKER: Here's proof the Lord works in mysterious ways – I came expecting to find a ship-wrack, and drownded bodies in need of burying – which service I am ever willing to perform, for a small contribution – group rates available – instead, it is a courtly scene. St. James's Park on a sunny May morn ne'er was so. TOM: Between the Dutch mercer, and the English lord, there must be treasure aplenty on that wrack – if you can divert them in the Castle, I'll get word to our merry friends – they can steal the longboat these rowed in on, and go fetch the goods. SRADDLE: Whilst you salvage the Dutch girl's maidenhead? TOM: Lost at sea already, I fear. NOW THERE WAS A CHANGE of scene to the interior of Castle Suckmire. As things were being re-arranged upon the stage, Oldenburg leaned close and said, 'Is that him, then?' 'Yes, that's Isaac Newton.' 'Well done – more than one Anglesey will be pleased – how did you flush him into the open?' 'I am not entirely sure.' 'What of the tangents paper?' 'One thing at a time, please, sir . . .' 'I cannot understand his reticence!' 'He's only published one thing in his life – ' 'The colors paper!? That was two years ago!' 'For you, two years of interminable waiting – for Isaac, two years of siege warfare – fending off Hooke on one front, Jesuits on the other.' 'Perhaps if you would only relate to him how you have passed the last two months – ' Daniel managed not to laugh in Oldenburg's face. UP ON THE STAGE IN Neville's Court, the plot was thickening, or, depending on how you liked your plots, expanding into a froth. Miss Straddle, played by Tess, was flirting with Eugene Stopcock, an infantry officer, who had rushed in from London to rescue his shipwrecked parents. Tom Runagate had already been to bed at least once with Lydia van Underdevater. The courtier Francis Buggermy had showed up incognito and begun chasing the slave Nzinga around in hopes of verifying certain rumors about the size of African men. Isaac Newton was pinching the high bridge of his nose and looking mildly nauseated. Oldenburg was glaring at Daniel, and several important personages were glaring from On High at Oldenburg. The play was entering Act V. Soon it would come to an end, triggering a plan, laid by Oldenburg, in which Isaac was finally going to be introduced to the King, and to the Royal Society at large. If Isaac's paper were not brought forth tonight, it never would be, and Isaac would be known only as an Alchemist who once invented a telescope. So Daniel excused himself and set out across Trinity's courtyards one more time. The lurkers in the Great Court had thinned out, or perhaps he simply was not paying so much attention to them – he had decided what to do, and that gave him liberty, for the first time in months, to tilt his head back and look up at the stars. It had turned out that Hooke, with his telescope project, had had much more on his mind than countering the ravings of some pedantic Jesuit. Sitting in the dark hole of Gresham's College, marking down the coordinates of various stars, he'd outlined the rudiments of a larger theory to Daniel: first that all cœlestial bodies attracted all others within their sphere of influence, by means of some gravitating power; second that all bodies put into motion moved forward in a straight line unless acted upon by some effectual power; third that the attractive power became more powerful as the body wrought upon came nearer to the center. Oldenburg did not yet know the magnitude of Isaac's powers. Not that Oldenburg was stupid – he was anything but. But Isaac, unlike, say, Leibniz the indefatigable letter-writer or Hooke the Royal Society stalwart, did not communicate his results, and did not appear to socialize with anyone save daft Alchemists. And so in Oldenburg's mind, Newton was a clever though odd chap who'd written a paper about colors and then got into a fracas over it with Hooke. If Newton would only mingle with the Fellows a bit, Oldenburg seemed to believe, he would soon learn that Hooke had quite put colors out of his mind and moved on to matters such as Universal Gravitation, which of course would not interest young Mr. Newton in the slightest. This entire plan was, in other words, an embryonic disaster. But it might not occur for another hundred years that most of the Royal Society, and a King with a passion for Natural Philosophy, would spend a night together in Cambridge, within shouting distance of the bed where Isaac slept and the table where he worked. Isaac had to be drawn out, and it had to happen tonight. If this would lead to open war with Hooke, so be it. Perhaps that was inevitable anyway, no matter what Daniel did in the next few minutes. DANIEL WAS BACK in the chambers. Roger Comstock, left behind, Cinderella-like, to tidy up and tend the furnaces, had apparently gotten bored and sneaked off to an alehouse, because the candles had all been snuffed, leaving the big room lit only by the furnaces' rosy glow. Here Daniel would've been at a stand, if not for the fact that he lived there, and could find his way round in the dark. He groped a candle out of a drawer and lit it from a furnace. Then he went into the room where he'd conversed with Isaac earlier. Rummaging through papers, trying to find the one about tangents – the first practical fruits of Isaac's old work about fluxions – he was reminded that the sight of something on this table had rattled Isaac, and persuaded him to expose himself to the awful torment of watching a comedy. Daniel kept a sharp eye out, but saw nothing except for tedious alchemical notes and recipes, many signed not 'Isaac Newton' but 'Jeova Sanctus Unus,' which was the pseudonym Isaac used for Alchemy work. In any case – without solving the eternal mystery of why Isaac did what he did – he spied the tangents paper on the far corner of the table, and stepped forward to reach for it. The place was suffused with odd sounds, mostly the seething and hissing of diverse fuels burning in the furnaces, and the endless popping and ticking of the wooden wall panels. Another sound, faint and furtive, had reached Daniel's ears from time to time, but that surly porter who bestrides the gate of the conscious mind, spurning most of what is brought in by the senses and admitting only perceptions of Import or Quality, had construed this as a mouse sapping and mining the wall, and shouldered it aside. Now, though, it did come to Daniel's notice, for it grew louder: more rat than mouse. Isaac's tangents paper was in his hand, but he stood still for a few moments, trying to work out where this rat was busy, so that he could come back in daylight and investigate. The sound was resonating in a partition separating this room from the big laboratory with the furnaces, which was not of regular shape, but had several pop-outs and alcoves, built, by men who'd long since passed away, for heaven only knew what reasons: perhaps to encase a chimney here, or add a bit of pantry space there. Daniel had a good idea of what lay on the opposite side of that wall that was making the grinding noises: it was a little sideboard, set into an alcove in the corner of the laboratory, probably used once by servants when that room had been a dining-hall. Nowadays, Isaac used the cabinets below it to store Alchemical supplies. The counter was stocked with mortars, pestles, &c. For certain of the things Isaac worked with had a marked yearning to burst into flame, and so he was at pains to store them in that particular alcove, as far as possible from the furnaces. Daniel walked as quietly as he could back into the laboratory. He set the tangents paper down on a table and then picked up an iron bar that was lying next to a furnace door for use as a poker. There was more than one way to get rid of rats; but sometimes the best approach was the simplest, viz. ambush and bludgeon. He stalked down an aisle between furnaces, wiggling the poker in his hand. The alcove had been partitioned from the rest of the room by a free-standing screen such as ladies were wont to dress behind, consisting of fabric (now shabby) pleated and hung on a light wooden frame. This was to stop flying sparks, and to shield Isaac's fragile scales and fine powders from gusts of wind coming through open windows or down chimneys. He faltered, for the gnawing had stopped, as if the rat sensed the approach of a predator. But then it started up again, very loud, and Daniel strode forward, stretched one toe out ahead of him, and kicked the screen out of the way. His poker-hand was drawn back behind his head, poised to ring down a death-blow, and the candle was thrust out before him to find and dazzle the rat, which he guessed would be out on the counter. Instead he found himself sharing a confined space with another man. Daniel was so astonished that he froze, and sprang several inches into the air, at the same instant, if such a combination were possible, and dropped the poker, and fumbled the candle. He had nearly shoved the flame right into the face of this other chap: Roger Comstock. Roger had been working in the dark with a mortar and pestle and so the sudden appearance of this flame in his face not only startled him half out of his wits, but blinded him as well. And on the heels of those emotions came terror. He dropped what he had been working on: a mortar, containing some dark gray powder, which he had been pouring into a cloth bag at the instant Daniel surprised him. Indeed drop did not do justice to Roger's treatment of these two items; gravity was not nearly quick enough. He thrust them away, and at the same time flung himself backwards. Daniel watched the flame of his candle grow to the size of a bull's head, enveloping his hand and arm as far as the elbow. He dropped it. The floor was carpeted with flame that leapt up in a great FOOM and disappeared, leaving the place perfectly dark. Not that all flames had gone, for Daniel could still hear them crackling; the darkness was because of dense smoke filling the whole room. Daniel inhaled some and wished he hadn't. This was gunpowder that Roger had been playing with. Roger was out of the house in five heartbeats, notwithstanding that he did it on his hands and knees. Daniel crawled out after him and stood outside the door long enough to purge his lungs with several deep draughts of fresh air. Roger had already scuttled across the garden and banged out the gate. Daniel went over to pull it closed, looking out first into the way. Some yards down, a couple of porters, shadowed under the vault of the Great Gate, regarded him with only moderate curiosity. It was expected that strange lights and noises would emanate from the residence of the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics. For shadowy figures to flee the building with smoke coming out of their clothes was only a little remarkable. Failing to close the garden gate was an egregious lapse; but Daniel saw to it. Then, holding his breath, he ventured back in. He found the windows by grope and hauled them open. The flames had caught and spread in the fabric of the toppled screen, but gone no farther, owing to that Isaac suffered very little that was combustible to abide in the furnace-room. Daniel stomped out a few glowing edges. In a more genteel setting, the smoke would have been accounted as a kind of damage to all the contents of the room that had been darkened and made noisome by it; but in a place such as this, it was nothing. What had occurred was not an explosion – for the gunpowder, fortunately, had not been confined – but a very rapid burning. The screen was wrecked. The cabinetry in the alcove was blackened. A scale had been blown off the counter and was probably ruined. The mortar that Roger had dropped lay in fat shards at the epicenter of the black burst, making Daniel think of the cannon that had exploded at the 'Siege of Maestricht,' and other such disasters he had heard about lately aboard ships of the Royal Navy. Surrounding it were burnt scraps of linen – the bag into which Roger had been decocting the gunpowder when Daniel had set fire to it. It was, in other words, the least possible amount of devastation that could possibly result from deflagration of a sack of gunpowder inside the house. That said, this corner of the laboratory was a shambles, and would have to be cleaned up – a task that would fall to Roger anyway. Unless, as seemed likely, Isaac fired him. One would think that being blown up would throw one's evening's schedule all awry. But all of this had passed very quickly, and there was no reason Daniel could not accomplish the errand that had brought him here. Indeed, the grave problems that had so burdened him on his walk over here were quite forgotten now, and would appear to be perfectly trivial seen against the stunning adventure of the last few minutes. His hand and, to a lesser degree, his face, were raw and red from flash-burns, and he suspected he might have to do without eyebrows for a few weeks. A quick change of robes and a wash were very much in order; no difficulty, as he lived upstairs. But having done those, Daniel picked up the tangents paper, shook off the black grit that re-punctuated it, and headed out the door. This was no more than a tenth of everything Isaac had accomplished with fluxions, but it was at least a shred of evidence – better than nothing – and sufficient to keep most Fellows of the Royal Society in bed with headaches for weeks. The night overhead was clear, the view excellent, the mysteries of the Universe all spread out above Trinity College. But Daniel lowered his sights and plodded toward the cone of steamy light where everyone was waiting. London Bridge 1673 Once the characteristic numbers of most notions are determined, the human race will have a new kind of tool, a tool that will increase the power of the mind much more than optical lenses helped our eyes, a tool that will be as far superior to microscopes or telescopes as reason is to vision. – LEIBNIZ, Philosophical Essays,trans. by Arlew and Garber Near the midpoint of London Bridge, a bit closer to the City than to Southwark, was a firebreak – a short gap in the row of buildings, like a missing tooth in a crowded jawbone. If you were drifting down-river in a boat, so that you could see all nineteen of the squat piers that held the bridge up, and all twenty of the ragstone arches and wooden drawbridges that let the water through, you'd be able to see that this open space – “the square,' it was called – stood directly above an arch that was wider than any of the others – thirty-four feet, at its widest. As you drew closer to the bridge, and it became more and more obvious that your life was in extreme danger, and your mind, therefore, became focused on practical matters, you'd notice something even more important, namely that the sluice between the starlings – the snowshoe-like platforms of rubble that served as footings for the piers – was also wider, in this place, than anywhere else on the bridge. Consequently the passage through it looked less like a boiling cataract than a river rushing down from mountains during the spring thaw. If you still had the ability to steer for it, you would. And if you were a passenger on this hypothetical boat, and you valued your life, you'd insist that the waterman tie up for a moment at the tip of the starling and let you out, so that you could pick your way over that jammed horde of more or less ancient piles and the in-fill of mucky rubble; take a stair up to the level of the roadway; run across the Square, not forgetting to dodge the carts rushing both ways; descend another stair to the other end of the starling; and then hop, skid, and stagger across it until you reached the end, where your waterman would be waiting to pick you up again if indeed his boat, and he, still existed. This accounted, anyway, for much that was peculiar about the part of London Bridge called the Square. Persons who went east and west on watermen's boats on the Thames tended to be richer and more important than those who went north and south across the Bridge, and the ones who actually cared enough about their lives, limbs, and estates to bother with climbing out and hiking over the starling tended to be richer and more important yet, and so the buildings that stood atop the Bridge to either side of the Square constituted location! location! location! to the better sort of retailers and publicans. Daniel Waterhouse spent a couple of hours loitering in the vicinity of the Square one morning, waiting for a certain man on a certain boat. However, the boat he waited for would be coming the other direction: working its way upstream from the sea. He took a seat in a coffee-house and amused himself watching flushed and sweaty ferry-passengers appear at the head of the stairs, as if they'd been spontaneously generated from the fœtid waters of the Thames. They'd crawl into the nearby tavern for a pint, fortifying themselves for the traversal of the Bridge's twelve-foot-wide roadway, where passengers were crushed between carts a few times a week. If they survived that, then they'd pop into the glover's or the haberdasher's for a bit of recreational shopping, and then perhaps dart into this coffee-house for a quick mug of java. The remainder of London Bridge was getting down at the heels, because much more fashionable shops were being put up in other parts of the city by the likes of Sterling, but the Square was prosperous and, because of the continual threat of boat-wrack and drowning, the merriest part of town. And in these days it tended to be crowded, especially when ships came across the Channel, and dropped anchor in the Pool, and their Continental passengers were ferried hither in watermen's boats. As one such boat drew near the Bridge, Daniel finished his coffee, settled his bill, and ventured out onto the street. Cartage and drayage had been baffled by a crowd of pedestrians. They all wanted to descend to the starling on the downstream side, and had formed a sort of bung that stopped not only the stairs but the street as well. Seeing that they were by and large City men, intent on some serious purpose, and not Vagabonds intent on his purse, Daniel insinuated himself into this crowd and was presently drawn in to the top of the stairs and flushed down to the top of the starling along with the rest. He supposed at first that all of these well-dressed men had come to greet specific passengers. But as the boat drew within earshot, they began to shout, not friendly greetings, but questions, in several languages, about the war. 'As a fellow Protestant – albeit Lutheran – it is my hoping that England and Holland shall become reconciled and that the war you speak of will no more exist.' The young German was standing up in a boat, wearing French fashions. But as the boat drew closer to the turbulence downstream of the Bridge, he came to his senses, and sat down. 'So much for hopes – now what of your observations, sir?' someone fired back – one of a few dozen who had by now crowded onto the starling, trying to get as close to the incoming boats and ferries as they could without falling into the deadly chute. Others were perched up on the edge of the Square, like gargoyles, still others were out on the river in boats plotting intercept courses, like boca-neers in the Caribbean. None of them was having any of this Lutheran diplomacy. None even knew who the young German was – just a passenger on a boat from abroad who was willing to talk. There were several other travelers on the same boat, but all of them ignored the shouting Londoners. If these had information, they would take it to the ‘Change, and tell the tale with silver, and propagate it through the chthonic channels of the Market. 'What ship were you on, sir?' someone bellowed. ' Ste-Catherine,sir.' 'Where did that ship come from, sir?' 'Calais.' 'Had you any conversation with Naval persons?' 'A little, perhaps.' 'Any news, or rumor, of cannons bursting on English ships?' 'Oh, sometimes it happens. By everyone in the ships of the melee, it is seen, for the whole side of the hull is out-blown, and out the bodies fly, or so they say. To all of the sailors, friend and enemy, it is a lesson of mortality, perhaps. Consequently they all talk about it. But in the present war it happens no more than usual, I think.' 'Were they Comstock cannons?' The German took a moment to understand that, without even having set foot on English soil yet, he had talked himself into deep trouble. 'Sir! The cannons of my lord Epsom are reckoned the finest in the world.' But no one wanted to hear that kind of talk. The topic had changed. 'Whence came you to Calais?' 'Paris.' 'Did you see troops moving on your journey across France?' 'A few ones, exhausted, south-going.' The gentlemen on the starling hummed and vibrated for a few moments, assimilating this. One broke away from the crowd, toiling back towards the stairs, and was engulfed in barefoot boys jumping up and down. He scribbled something on a bit of paper and handed it to the one who jumped highest. This one spun, forced a path through the others, took the stairs four at a time, broke loose onto the Square, vaulted over a wagon, spun a fishwife, and then began to build speed up the bridge. From here to the London shore was a hundred and some yards, from there to the ‘Change was six hundred – he'd be there in three minutes. Meanwhile the interrogation continued: 'Did you see Ships of Force in the Channel, mein Herr ? English, French, Dutch?' 'There was – ' and here the man's English gave way. He made a helpless, encompassing gesture. 'Fog!' 'Fog,' he repeated. 'Did you hear guns?' 'A few – but very likely they were only signals. Coded data speeding through the fog, so opaque to light, but so transparent to sound – ' and here he lost control of his intellectual sphincters and began to think out loud in French, fortified with Latin, working out a system for sending encrypted data from place to place using explosions, building on ideas from Wilkins's Cryptonomicon but marrying them to a practical plan that, in its lavish expenditure of gunpowder, would be sure to please John Comstock. In other words, he identified himself (to Daniel anyway) as Dr. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. The watchers lost interest and began aiming their questions at another boat. Leibniz set foot on England. He was closely followed by a couple of other German gentlemen, somewhat older, much less talkative, and (Daniel could only suppose) more important. They in turn were pursued by a senior servant who headed up a short column of porters lugging boxes and bags. But Leibniz had burdened himself with a wooden box he would not let go of. Daniel stepped forward to greet them, but was cut off by some brusque fellow who shouldered in to hand a sealed letter to one of the older gentlemen, and whispered to him for a moment in Low-Dutch. Daniel straightened up in annoyance. As luck would have it, he looked toward the London shore. His eye lingered on a quay just downstream of the Bridge: a jumbled avalanche of blackened rubble left over from the Fire. It could have been rebuilt years ago, but hadn't, because it had been judged more important to rebuild other things first. A few men were doing work of a highly intellectual nature, stretching lines about and drawing sketches. One of them – incredibly – just happened to be Robert Hooke, City Surveyor, whom Daniel had quietly abandoned at Gresham's College an hour ago. Not so incredibly (given that he was Hooke), he'd noticed Daniel standing there on the starling in the middle of the river, greeting what was quite obviously a foreign delegation, and was therefore glaring and brooding. Leibniz and the others discussed matters in High-Dutch. The interloper turned round to glance at Daniel. It was one of the Dutch Ambassador's errand-boys- cum-spies. The Germans formed some sort of a plan, and it seemed to involve splitting up. Daniel stepped in and introduced himself. The other Germans were introduced by their names but what mattered was their ancestry: one of them was the nephew of the Archbishop of Mainz, the other the son of Baron von Boineburg, who was the same Archbishop's Minister. In other words very important people in Mainz, hence rather important ones in the Holy Roman Empire, which was more or less neutral in the French/English/Dutch broil. It had all the signs of being some sort of peace-brokering mission, i.e. Leibniz knew who he was, and asked, 'Is Wilkins still alive?' 'Yes . . .' 'Thank God!' 'Though very ill. If you would like to visit him I would suggest doing it now. I'll escort you gladly, Dr. Leibniz . . . may I have the honor of assisting you with that box?' 'You are very civil,' Leibniz said, 'but I'll hold it.' 'If it contains gold or jewelry, you'd best hold it tight. ' 'Are the streets of London not safe?' 'Let us say that the Justices of the Peace are mostly concerned with Dissenters and Dutchmen, and our cutpurses have not been slow to adapt.' 'What this contains is infinitely more valuable than gold,' Leibniz said, beginning to mount the stairs, 'and yet it cannot be stolen.' Daniel lunged forward in an effort to keep step. Leibniz was slender, of average height, and tended to bend forward when he walked, the head anticipating the feet. Once he had reached the level of the roadway he turned sharply and strode towards the City of London, ignoring the various taverns and shops. He did not look like a monster. According to Oldenburg, the Parisians who frequented the Salon at the Hotel Montmor – the closest French equivalent to the Royal Society of London – had begun using the Latin word monstro to denote Leibniz. This from men who'd personally known Descartes and Fermat and who considered exaggeration an unspeakably vulgar habit. It had led to some etymological researches among some members of the R.S. Did they mean Leibniz was grotesquely misshapen? An unnatural hybrid of a man and something else? A divine warning? 'He lives up this way, does he not?' 'The Bishop has had to move because of his illness – he's at his stepdaughter's house in Chancery Lane.' 'Then still we go this way – then left.' 'You have been to London before, Dr. Leibniz?' 'I have been studying London-paintings.' 'I'm afraid most of those became antiquarian curiosities after the Fire – like street-plans of Atlantis.' 'And yet viewing several depictions of even an imaginary city, is enlightening in a way,' Leibniz said. 'Each painter can view the city from only one standpoint at a time, so he will move about the place, and paint it from a hilltop on one side, then a tower on the other, then from a grand intersection in the middle – all on the same canvas. When we look at the canvas, then, we glimpse in a small way how God understands the universe – for he sees it from every point of view at once. By populating the world with so many different minds, each with its own point of view, God gives us a suggestion of what it means to be omniscient.' Daniel decided to step back and let Leibniz's words reverberate, as organ-chords must do in Lutheran churches. Meanwhile they reached the north end of the Bridge, where the racket of the water-wheels, confined and focused in the stone vault of the gatehouse, made conversation impossible. Not until they'd made it out onto dry land, and begun to ascend the Fish Street hill, did Daniel ask, 'I note you've already been in communication with the Dutch Ambassador. May I assume that your mission is not entirely natural-philosophick in nature?' 'A rational question – in a way,' Leibniz grumbled. 'We are about the same age, you and I?' he asked, giving Daniel a quick inspection. His eyes were unsettling. Depending on what kind of monster he was, either beady, or penetrating. 'I am twenty-six.' 'So am I. We were born about sixteen forty-six. The Swedes took Prague that year, and invaded Bavaria. The Inquisition was burning Jews in Mexico. Similar terrible things were happening in England, I assume?' 'Cromwell crushed the King's army at Newark – chased him out of the country – John Comstock was wounded – ' 'And we are speaking only of kings and noblemen. Imagine the sufferings of common people and Vagabonds, who possess equal stature in God's eyes. And yet you ask me whether my mission is philosophick or diplomatic, as if those two things can neatly be separated.' 'Rude and stupid I know, but it is my duty to make conversation. You are saying that it should be the goal of all natural philosophers to restore peace and harmony to the world of men. This I cannot dispute.' Leibniz now softened. 'Our goal is to prevent the Dutch war from growing into a general conflagration. Please do not be offended by my frankness now: the Archbishop and the Baron are followers of the Royal Society – as am I. They are Alchemists – which I am not , except when it is politic. They hope that through pursuit of Natural Philosophy I may make contacts with important figures in this country, whom it would normally be difficult to reach through diplomatic channels.' 'Ten years ago I might have been offended,' Daniel said. 'Now, there's nothing I'll not believe.' 'But my interest in meeting the Lord Bishop of Chester is as pure as any human motive can be.' 'He will sense that, and be cheered by it,' Daniel said. 'The last few years of Wilkins's life have been sacrified entirely to politics – he has been working to dismantle the framework of theocracy, to prevent its resurgence, in the event a Papist ascends to the throne – ' 'Or already has done so,' Leibniz said immediately. The offhanded way in which Leibniz suggested that King Charles II might be a crypto-Catholic hinted to Daniel that it was common knowledge on the Continent. This made him feel hopelessly dull, naïve, and provincial. He had suspected the King of many crimes and deceptions, but never of baldly lying about his religion to the entire Realm. He had plenty of time to conceal his annoyance as they were passing through the heart of the city, which had turned into a single vast and eternal building-site even as the normal business of the ‘Change and the goldsmiths' shops continued. Paving-stones were whizzing between Daniel and the Doctor like cannonballs, shovels slicing the air around their heads like cutlasses, barrows laden with gold and silver and bricks and mud trundling like munition-carts over temporary walk-ways of planks and stomped dirt. Perhaps reading anxiety on Daniel's face, Leibniz said, 'Just like the Rue Vivienne in Paris,' with a casual hand-wave. 'I go there frequently to read certain manuscripts in the Bibliothèque du Roi.' 'I've been told that a copy of every book printed in France must be sent to that place.' 'Yes.' 'But it was established in the same year that we had our Fire – so I ween that it must be very small yet, as it's had only a few years to grow.' 'A few very good years in mathematics, sir. And it also contains certain unpublished manuscripts of Descartes and Pascal.' 'But none of the classics?' 'I had the good fortune to be raised, or to raise myself, in my father's library, which contained all of them.' 'Your father was mathematickally inclined?' 'Difficult to say. As a traveler comprehends a city only by viewing pictures of it drawn from differing standpoints, I know my father only by having read the books that he read.' 'I understand the similitude now, Doctor. The Bibliothèque du Roi then gives you the closest thing that currently exists to God's understanding of the world.' 'And yet with a bigger library we could come ever so much closer.' 'But with all due respect, Doctor, I do not understand how this street could be anything less like the Rue Vivienne – we have no such Bibliothèque in England.' 'The Bibliothèque du Roi is just a house, you see, a house Colbert happened to buy on the Rue Vivienne – probably as an investment, because that street is the center of goldsmiths. Every ten days, from ten in the morning until noon, all of the merchants of Paris send their money to the Rue Vivienne to be counted. I sit there in Colbert's house trying to understand Descartes, working the mathematical proofs that Huygens, my tutor, gives me, and looking out the windows as the street fills up with porters staggering under their back-loads of gold and silver, converging on a few doorways. Are you beginning to understand my riddle now?' 'Which riddle was that?' 'This box! I said it contained something infinitely more valuable than gold, and yet it could not be stolen. Which way do we turn here?' For they'd come out into the hurricane where Threadneedle, Cornhill, Poultry, and Lombard all collided. Message-boys were flying across that intersection like quarrels from crossbows – or (Daniel suspected) like broad Hints that he was failing to Get. LONDON CONTAINED A HUNDRED LORDS , bishops, preachers, scholars, and gentlemen-philosophers who would gladly have provided Wilkins with a comfortable sick-bed, but he had ended up in his stepdaughter's home in Chancery Lane, actually rather close to where the Waterhouses lived. The entrance to the place, and the street in front, were choked with sweating courtiers – not the sleek top-level ones but the dented, scarred, slightly too old and slightly too ugly ones who actually got everything done.*They were milling in the street around a black coach blazoned with the arms of Count Penistone. The house was an old one (the Fire had stopped a few yards short of it). It was one of those slump-shouldered, thatch-roofed, half-timbered Canterbury Tales productions, completely out-moded by the gleaming coach and the whip-thin rapiers. 'You see – despite the purity of your motives, you're immersed in politics already,' Daniel said. 'The lady of the house is Cromwell's niece.' 'What!? The Cromwell?' 'The same whose skull gazes down on Westminster from the end of a stick. Now, the owner of that excellent coach is Knott Bolstrood, Count Penistone – his father founded a sect called the Barkers, normally lumped in with many others under the pejorative term of Puritans. The Barkers are gratuitously radical, however – for example, they believe that Government and Church should have naught to do with each other, and that all slaves in the world should be set free.' 'But the gentlemen in front are dressed like courtiers! Are they getting ready to siege the Puritan-house?' 'They are Bolstrood's hangers-on. You see, Count Penistone is His Majesty's Secretary of State.' 'I had heard that King Charles the Second made a Phanatique his Secretary of State, but could not believe it.' 'Consider it – could Barkers exist in any other country? Save Amsterdam, that is.' 'Naturally not!' Leibniz said, lightly offended by the very idea. 'They would be extinguished.' 'Therefore, whether or not he feels any loyalty toward the King, Knott Bolstrood has no choice but to stand for a free and independent England – and so, when Dissenters accuse the King of being too close to France, His Majesty need only point to Bolstrood as the living credential of his independent foreign policy.' 'But it's all a farce!' Leibniz muttered. 'All Paris knows England's in France's pocket.' 'All London knows it, too – the difference is that we have three dozen theatres here – Paris has only one of them – ' Leibniz's turn, finally, to be baffled. 'I don't understand.' 'All I am saying is that we happen to enjoy farces.' 'Why is Bolstrood visiting the niece of Cromwell?' 'He's probably visiting Wilkins.' Leibniz stopped and considered matters. 'Tempting. But the protocol is impossible. I cannot enter the house!' 'Of course you can – with me,' Daniel said. 'Just follow.' 'But I must go back and fetch my companions – for I do not have the standing to disturb the Secretary of State – ' 'I do,' Daniel said. 'One of my earliest memories is of watching him destroy a pipe organ with a sledgehammer. Seeing me will give him a warm feeling.' Leibniz stopped and looked aghast; Daniel could almost see, reflected in his eyes, the stained-glass windows and organ-pipes of some fine Lutheran church in Leipzig. 'Why would he commit such an outrage!?' 'Because it was in an Anglican cathedral. He would have been about twenty – a high-spirited age.' 'Your family were followers of Cromwell?' 'It is more correct to say that Cromwell was a follower of my father – may God rest both of their souls.' But now they were in the midst of the courtier-mob, and it was too late for Leibniz to obey his instincts, and run away. They spent several minutes pushing among progressively higher-ranking and better-dressed men, into the house and up the stairs, and finally entered a tiny low-ceilinged bedchamber. It smelled as if Wilkins had already died, but most of him still lived – he was propped up on pillows, with a board on his lap, and a fine-looking document on the board. Knott Bolstrood – forty-two years old – knelt next to the bed. He turned round to look as Daniel entered. During the ten years Knott had survived on the Common-Side of Newgate Prison, living in a dark place among murderers and lunaticks, he had developed a strong instinct for watching his back. It was as useful for a Secretary of State as it had been for a marauding Phanatique. 'Brother Daniel!' 'My lord.' 'You'll do as well as anyone – better than most.' 'Do for what, sir?' 'Witnessing the Bishop's signature.' Bolstrood got a quill charged with ink. Daniel wrapped Wilkins's puffy fingers around it. After a bit of heavy breathing on the part of its owner, the hand began to move, and a tangle of lines and curves began to take shape on the page, bearing the same relationship to Wilkins's signature as a ghost to a man. It was a good thing, in other words, that several persons were on hand to verify it. Daniel had no idea what this document was. But from the way it was engrossed he could guess that it was meant for the eyes of the King. Count Penistone was a man in a hurry, after that. But before he left he said to Daniel: 'If you have any stock in the Duke of York's Guinea Company, sell it – for that Popish slave-monger is going to reap the whirlwind.' Then, for maybe the second or third time in his life, Knott Bolstrood smiled. 'Show it to me, Dr. Leibniz,' Wilkins said, skipping over all of the formalities; he had not urinated in three days and so there was a certain urgency about everything. Leibniz sat gingerly on the edge of the bed, and opened the box. Daniel saw gears, cranks, shafts. He thought it might be a new sort of timepiece, but it had no dial and no hands – only a few wheels with numbers stamped on them. 'It owes much to Monsieur Pascal's machine, of course,' Leibniz said, 'but this one can multiply numbers as well as add and subtract them.' 'Make it work for me, Doctor.' 'I must confess to you that it is not finished yet.' Leibniz frowned, tilted the box toward the light, and blew into it sharply. A cockroach flew out and traced a flailing parabola to the floor and scurried under the bed. 'This is just a demo'. But when it is finished, it will be magnifique. ' 'Never mind,' Wilkins said. 'It uses denary numbers?' 'Yes, like Pascal's – but binary would work better – ' 'You needn't tell me, ' Wilkins said, and then rambled for at least a quarter of an hour, quoting whole pages from relevant sections of the Cryptonomicon. Leibniz finally cleared his throat and said, 'There are mechanical reasons, too – with denary numbers, too many meshings of gears are necessary – friction and backlash play havoc.' 'Hooke! Hooke could build it,' Wilkins said. 'But enough of machines. Let us speak of Pansophism. Tell me, now – have you met with success in Vienna?' 'I have written to the Emperor several times, describing the French king's Bibliothèque du Roi – ' 'Trying to incite his Envy – ?' 'Yes – but in his hierarchy of vices, Sloth would appear to reign unchallenged by Envy or anything else. Have you met with success here, my lord?' 'Sir Elias Ashmole is starting a brave library – but he's distracted and addled with Alchemy. I have had to attend to more fundamental matters – ' Wilkins said, and gestured weakly toward the door through which Bolstrood had departed. 'I believe that binary arithmetickal engines will be of enormous significance – Oldenburg, too, is most eager.' 'If I could carry your work forward, sir, I would consider myself privileged.' 'Now we are only being polite – I have no time. Waterhouse!' Leibniz closed up his box. The Bishop of Chester watched the lid closing over the engine, and his eyelids almost closed at the same moment. But then he summoned up a bit more strength. Leibniz backed out of the way, and Daniel took his place. 'My Lord?' It was all he could get out. Drake had been his father, but John Wilkins really was his lord in almost every sense of the word. His lord, his bishop, his minister, his professor. 'The responsibility now falls upon you to make it all happen.' 'My Lord? To make what happen?' But Wilkins was either dead or asleep. THEY STUMBLED THROUGH a small dark kitchen and out into the maze of yards and alleys behind Chancery Lane, where they drew the attention of diverse roosters and dogs. Pursued by their hue and cry, Mr. Waterhouse and Dr. Leibniz emerged into a district of theatres and coffee-houses. Any one of those coffee-houses would have sufficed, but they were close to Queen Street – another of Hooke's paving-projects. Daniel had begun to feel like a flea under the Great Microscope. Hooke subtended about half of the cosmos, and made Daniel feel as if he were flitting from one place of refuge to another, even though he had nothing to hide. Leibniz was hale, and seemed to enjoy exploring a new city. Daniel got them turned back in the direction of the river. He was trying to make out what responsibility, specifically, had just been placed on his shoulders by Wilkins. He realized – after a quarter of an hour of being a very poor conversationalist – that Leibniz might have ideas on the subject. 'You said you wanted to carry Wilkins's work forward, Doctor. Which of his projects were you referring to? Flying to the moon, or – ' 'The Philosophical Language,' Leibniz said, as if this should have been obvious. He knew that Daniel had been involved in that project, and seemed to take the question as a sign that Daniel wasn't especially proud of it – which was true. Noting Leibniz's respect for the project, Daniel felt a stab of misgivings that perhaps the Philosophical Language had some wonderful properties that he had been too stupid to notice. 'What more is there to be done with it?' Daniel asked. 'You have some refinements – additions – ? You wish to translate the work into German – ? You're shaking your head, Doctor – what is it, then?' 'I was trained as a lawyer. Don't look so horrified, Mr. Waterhouse, it is respectable enough, for an educated man in Germany. You must remember that we don't have a Royal Society. After I was awarded my Doctor of Jurisprudence, I went to work for the Archbishop of Mainz, who gave me the job of reforming the legal code – which was a Tower of Babel – Roman and Germanic and local common law all mangled together. I concluded that there was little point in jury-rigging something. What was needed was to break everything down into certain basic concepts and begin from first principles.' 'I can see how the Philosophical Language would be useful in breaking things down,' Daniel said, 'but to build them back up, you would need something else – ' 'Logic,' Leibniz said. 'Logic has a dismal reputation among the higher primates in the Royal Society – ' 'Because they associate it with the Scholastic pedants who tormented them in university,' Leibniz said agreeably. 'I'm not talking about that sort of thing! When I say logic, I mean Euclidean.' 'Begin with certain axioms and combine them according to definite rules – ' 'Yes – and build up a system of laws that is as provable, and as internally consistent, as the theory of conic sections.' 'But you have recently moved to Paris, have you not?' Leibniz nodded. 'Part of the same project. For obvious reasons, I need to improve my knowledge of mathematics – what better place for it?' Then his face got a distracted, brooding look. 'Actually there was another reason – the Archbishop sent me as an emissary, to tender a certain proposal to Louis XIV.' 'So today is not the first time you have combined Natural Philosophy with Diplomacy – ' 'Nor the last, I fear.' 'What was the proposal you set before the King?' 'I only got as far as Colbert, actually. But it was that, instead of invading her neighbors, La France ought to make an expedition to Egypt, and establish an Empire there – creating a threat to the Turk's left flank – Africa – and forcing him to move some armies away from his right flank – ' 'Christendom.' 'Yes.' Leibniz sighed. 'It sounds – er – audacious,' Daniel said, now on a diplomatic mission of his own. 'By the time I'd arrived in Paris, and secured an appointment with Colbert, King Louis had already flung his invasion-force into Holland and Germany.' 'Ah, well – 'twas a fine enough idea.' 'Perhaps some future monarch of France will revive it,' Leibniz said. 'For the Dutch, the consequences were dire. For me, it was fortuitous – no longer straining at diplomatic gnats, I could go to Colbert's house in the Rue Vivienne and grapple with philosophick giants.' 'I've given up trying to grapple with them,' Daniel sighed, 'and now only dodge their steps.' They rambled all the way down to the Strand and sat down in a coffee-house with south-facing windows. Daniel tilted the arithmetickal engine toward the sun and inspected its small gears. 'Forgive me for asking, Doctor, but is this purely a conversation-starter, or – ?' 'Perhaps you should go back and ask Wilkins.' 'Touché.' Now some sipping of coffee. 'My Lord Chester spoke correctly – in a way – when he said that Hooke could build this,' Daniel said. 'Only a few years ago, he was a creature of the Royal Society, and he would have. Now he's a creature of London, and he has artisans build most of his watches. The only exceptions, perhaps, are the ones he makes for the King, the Duke of York, and the like.' 'If I can explain to Mr. Hooke the importance of this device, I'm confident he'll undertake it.' 'You don't understand Hooke,' Daniel said. 'Because you are German, and because you have diverse foreign connections, Hooke will assume you are a part of the Grubendolian cabal – which in his mind looms so vast that a French invasion of Egypt would be only a corner of it.' 'Grubendol?' Leibniz said. Then, before Daniel could say it, he continued, 'I see – it is an anagram for Oldenburg.' Daniel ground his teeth for a while, remembering how long it had taken him to decipher the same anagram, then continued: 'Hooke is convinced that Oldenburg is stealing his inventions – sending them overseas in encrypted letters. What is worse, he saw you disembarking at the Bridge, and being handed a letter by a known Dutchman. He'll want to know what manner of Continental intrigues you're mixed up in.' 'It's not a secret that my patron is the Archbishop of Mainz,' Leibniz protested. 'But you said you were a Lutheran.' 'And I am – but one of the Archbishop's objectives is to reconcile the two churches.' ' Herewe say there are more than two,' Daniel reminded him. 'Is Hooke a religious man?' 'If you mean ‘does he go to church,' then no,' Daniel admitted, after some hesitation. 'But if you mean ‘does he believe in God' then I should say yes – the Microscope and Telescope are his stained-glass windows, the animalcules in a drop of his semen, or the shadows on Saturn's rings, are his heavenly Visions.' 'Is he like Spinoza, then?' 'You mean, one who says God is nothing more than Nature? I doubt it.' 'What does Hooke want?' 'He is busy all day and night designing new buildings, surveying new streets – ' 'Yes, and I am busy overhauling the German legal code – but it is not what I want. ' 'Mr. Hooke pursues various schemes and intrigues against Oldenburg – ' 'But surely not because he wants to?' 'He writes papers, and lectures – ' Leibniz scoffed. 'Not a tenth of what he knows is written down, is it?' 'You must keep in mind, about Hooke, that he is poorly understood, partly because of his crookedness and partly because of his difficult personal qualities. In a world where many still refuse to believe in the Copernican Hypothesis, some of Hooke's more forward ideas would be considered grounds for imprisonment in Bedlam.' Leibniz's eyes narrowed. 'Is it Alchemy, then?' 'Mr. Hooke despises Alchemy.' 'Good!' Leibniz blurted – most undiplomatically. Daniel covered a smile with his coffee-cup. Leibniz looked horrified, fearing that Daniel might be an Alchemist himself. Daniel put him at ease by quoting from Hooke: “'Why should we endeavour to discover Mysteries in that which has no such thing in it? And like Rabbis find out Cabalism, and ænigmas in the Figure, and placing of Letters, where no such thing lies hid: whereas in natural forms . . . the more we magnify the object, the more excellencies and mysteries do appear; and the more we discover the imperfections of our senses, and the Omnipotency and Infinite perceptions of the great Creator.'' 'So Hooke believes that the secrets of the world are to be found in some microscopic process.' 'Yes – snowflakes, for example. If each snowflake is unique, then why are the six arms of a given snowflake the same?' 'If we assume that the arms grew outwards from the center, then there must be something in that center that imbues each of the six arms with the same organizing principle – just as all oak trees, and all lindens, share a common nature, and grow into the same general shape.' 'But to speak of some mysterious nature is to be like the Scholastics – Aristotle dressed up in a doublet,' Daniel said. 'Or in an Alchemist's robe – ' Leibniz returned. 'Agreed. Newton would argue – ' 'That fellow who invented the telescope?' 'Yes. He would argue that if you could catch a snowflake, melt it, and distill its water, you could extract some essence that would be the embodiment of its nature in the physical world, and account for its shape.' 'Yes – that is a good distillation, as it were, of the Alchemists' mental habit – which is to believe that anything we cannot understand must have some physical residue that can in principle be refined from coarse matter.' 'Mr. Hooke, by contrast, is convinced that Nature's ways are consonant to man's reason. As the beating of a fly's wings is consonant to the vibration of a plucked string, so that the sound of one, produces a sympathetic resonance in the other – in the same way, every phenomenon in the world can, in principle, be understood by human ratiocination.' Leibniz said, 'And so with a sufficiently powerful microscope, Hooke might peer into the core of a snowflake at the moment of its creation and see its internal parts meshing, like gears of a watch made by God.' 'Just so, sir.' 'And this is what Hooke wants ?' 'It is the implicit goal of all his researches – it is what he must believe and must look for, because that is the nature of Hooke.' 'Now you are talking like an Aristotelian,' Leibniz jested. Then he reached across the table and put his hand on the box, and said something that was apparently quite serious. 'What a watch is to time, this engine is to thought. ' 'Sir! You show me a few gears that add and multiply numbers – well enough. But this is not the same as thought !' 'What is a number, Mr. Waterhouse?' Daniel groaned. 'How can you ask such questions?' 'How can you not ask them, sir? You are a philosopher, are you not?' 'A Natural Philosopher.' 'Then you must agree that in the modern world, mathematicks is at the heart of Natural Philosophy – it is like the mysterious essence in the core of the snowflake. When I was fifteen years old, Mr. Waterhouse, I was wandering in the Rosenthal – which is a garden on the edge of Leipzig – when I decided that in order to be a Natural Philosopher I would have to put aside the old doctrine of substantial forms and instead rely upon Mechanism to explain the world. This led me inevitably to mathematicks.' 'When I was fifteen, I was handing out Phanatiqual libels just down the street from here, and dodging the Watch – but in time, Doctor, as Newton and I studied Descartes at Cambridge, I came to share your view concerning the supreme position of mathematics.' 'Then I repeat my question: What is a number? And what is it to multiply two numbers?' 'Whatever it is, Doctor, it is different from thinking .' 'Bacon said, ‘Whatever has sufficient differences, perceptible by the sense, is in nature competent to express cogitations.' You cannot deny that numbers are in that sense competent – ' 'To express cogitation, yes! But to express cogitations is not to perform them, or else quills and printing-presses would write poetry by themselves.' 'Can your mind manipulate this spoon directly?' Leibniz said, holding up a silver spoon, and then setting it down on the table between them. 'Not without my hands.' 'So, when you think about the spoon, is your mind manipulating the spoon?' 'No. The spoon is unaffected, no matter what I think about it.' 'Because our minds cannot manipulate physical objects – cup, saucer, spoon – instead they manipulate symbols of them, which are stored in the mind.' 'I will accept that.' 'Now, you yourself helped Lord Chester devise the Philosophical Language, whose chief virtue is that it assigns all things in the world positions in certain tables – positions that can be encoded by numbers.' 'Again, I agree that numbers can express cogitations, through a sort of encryption. But performing cogitations is another matter entirely!' 'Why? We add, subtract, and multiply numbers.' 'Suppose the number three represents a chicken, and the number twelve the Rings of Saturn – what then is three times twelve?' 'Well, you can't just do it at random, ' Leibniz said, 'any more than Euclid could draw lines and circles at random, and come up with theorems. There has to be a formal system of rules, according to which the numbers are combined.' 'And you propose building a machine to do this?' ' Pourquoi non?With the aid of a machine, truth can be grasped as if pictured on paper.' 'But it is still not thinking. Thinking is what angels do – it is a property given to Man by God.' 'How do you suppose God gives it to us?' 'I do not pretend to know, sir!' 'If you take a man's brain and distill him, can you extract a mysterious essence – the divine presence of God on Earth?' 'That is called the Philosophick Mercury by Alchemists.' 'Or, if Hooke were to peer into a man's brain with a good enough microscope, would he see tiny meshings of gears?' Daniel said nothing. Leibniz had imploded his skull. The gears were jammed, the Philosophick Mercury dribbling out his ear-holes. 'You've already sided with Hooke, and against Newton, concerning snowflakes – so may I assume you take the same position concerning brains?' Leibniz continued, now with exaggerated politeness. Daniel spent a while staring out the window at a point far away. Eventually his awareness came back into the coffee-house. He glanced, a bit furtively, at the arithmetical engine. 'There is a place in Micrographia where Hooke describes the way flies swarm around meat, butterflies around flowers, gnats around water – giving the semblance of rational behavior. But he thinks it is all because of internal mechanisms triggered by the peculiar vapors arising from meat, flowers, et cetera.In other words, he thinks that these creatures are no more rational than a trap, where an animal seizing a piece of bait pulls a string that fires a gun. A savage watching the trap kill the animal might suppose it to be rational. But the trap is not rational – the man who contrived the trap is. Now, if you – the ingenious Dr. Leibniz – contrive a machine that gives the impression of thinking – is it really thinking, or merely reflecting your genius?' 'You could as well have asked: are we thinking? Or merely reflecting God's genius?' 'Suppose I had asked it, Doctor – what would your answer be?' 'My answer, sir, is both.' 'Both? But that's impossible. It has to be one or the other.' 'I do not agree with you, Mr. Waterhouse.' 'If we are mere mechanisms, obeying rules laid down by God, then all of our actions are predestined, and we are not really thinking.' 'But Mr. Waterhouse, you were raised by Puritans, who believe in predestination.' 'Raised by them, yes . . .' Daniel said, and let it hang in the air for a while. 'You no longer accept predestination?' 'It does not resonate sweetly with my observations of the world, as a good hypothesis ought to.' Daniel sighed. 'Now I see why Newton has chosen the path of Alchemy.' 'When you say he chose that path, you imply that he must have rejected another. Are you saying that your friend Newton explored the idea of a mechanically determined brain, and rejected it?' 'It may be he explored it, if only in his dreams and nightmares.' Leibniz raised his eyebrows and spent a few moments staring at the clutter of pots and cups on the table. 'This is one of the two great labyrinths into which human minds are drawn: the question of free will versus predestination. You were raised to believe in the latter. You have rejected it – which must have been a great spiritual struggle – and become a thinker. You have adopted a modern, mechanical philosophy. But that very philosophy now seems to be leading you back towards predestination. It is most difficult.' 'But you claim to know of a third way, Doctor. I should like to hear of it.' 'And I should like to tell of it,' Leibniz said, 'but I must part from you now, and make rendezvous with my traveling companions. May we continue on some other day?' AboardMinerva, Cape Cod Bay, Massachusetts NOVEMBER 1713 HE DISSECTED MORE than his share of dead men's heads during those early Royal Society days, and knows that the hull of the skull is all wrapped about with squishy rigging: haul-yards of tendon and braces of ligament cleated to pinrails on the jawbone and temple, tugging at the corners of spreading canvases of muscle that curve over the forehead and wrap the old Jolly Roger in as many overlapping layers as there are sails on a ship of the line. As Daniel trudges up out of Minerva 's bilge, dragging a chinking sack of ammunition behind him, he feels all that stuff tightening up, steadily and inexorably, each stairstep a click of the pawls, as if invisible sailors were turning capstans inside his skull. He's spent the last hour below the water-line – never his favorite place on shipboard, but safe from cannonballs anyway – smashing plates with a hammer and bellowing old songs, and never been so relaxed in all his life. But now he's climbed back up into the center of the hull, just the sort of bulky bull's-eye pirates might aim swivel-guns at if they lacked confidence in their ability to pick off small fine targets from their wave-tossed platforms. Minerva's got a spacious stairwell running all the way down through the middle of her, just ahead of the mighty creaking trunk of the mainmast, with two flights of stairs spiraling opposite directions so the men descending don't interfere with those ascending – or so doddering Doctors with sacks of pottery-shards do not hinder boys running up from the hold with – what? The light's dim. They appear to be canvas sacks – heavy bulging polyhedra with rusty nails protruding from the vertices. Daniel's glad they're going up the other stairs, because he wouldn't want one of those things to bump into him. It'd be certain death from lockjaw. Some important procedure's underway on the gundeck. The gunports are all closed, except for one cracked open a hand's breadth on the starboard side – therefore, not far from Daniel when he emerges from the staircase. Several relatively important officers have gathered in a semicircle around this port, as if for a baptism. There's a general commotion of pinging and thudding coming from the hull-planks and the deck above. It could be gunfire. And if it could be, it probably is. Someone grabs the sack from Daniel and drags it to the center of the gundeck. Men with empty blunderbusses converge on it like jackals on a haunch. Daniel's elbowed hard by a man hauling on a line that enters Minerva through a small orifice above the gunport. This has the effect of (1) knocking Daniel down on his bony pelvis and (2) swinging said gunport all the way open, creating a sudden square of light. Framed in it is part of the rigging of a smaller ship, so close that a younger man could easily jump to it. There is a man – a pirate – on that ship pointing a musket in Daniel's direction, but he's struck down by a gaudy spray of out-moded china fragments, fired down from Minerva's upperdeck. 'Caltrops away!' says someone, and boys with sacks lunge toward the open gunport and hurl out a tinkling cosmos, down to the deck of the smaller ship. Moments later the same ceremony's repeated through a gunport on the larboard side – so there must be a pirate-vessel there , too. The gunports are hauled closed again, sporting new decorations: constellations of lead balls fired into 'em from below. The screaming/bellowing ratio has climbed noticeably. Daniel (helping himself to his feet, thank you, and hobbling crabwise to a safe haven near the mainmast, to inventory his complaints) reckons that the screaming must originate from shoeless pirates with caltrop-spikes between their metatarsals – until he hears 'Fire! Fire!' and notes a curl of smoke invading the gundeck through a cracked gunport, speared on a shaft of sunlight. Then some instinct makes Daniel forget his bruises and sprains – he's up the last flight of stairs, spry as any eight-year-old powder monkey, and out in the sail-dappled sunlight, where he'll happily risk musket-balls. But it's the pirate-sloop, not Minerva, that's on fire. Lines are going slack all over the starboard half of the ship. Each of them happens to terminate in a rusty grappling-hook that's lodged in a ratline or a rail. The pirates are cutting themselves free! Now comes a general rush of men to larboard, where a whaleboat is still pestering them. Minerva rolls that direction on a sea. The whaleboat comes into view, no longer eclipsed by the hull's tumblehome, and a score of muskets and blunderbusses fire down into it at once. Daniel only glimpses the result – appalling – then Minerva rolls starboard and hides it from view. The men throw their weapons into lockers and ascend into the rigging, pursuant to commands from van Hoek, who's up on the poop deck bellowing into a shiny trumpet of hammered brass. There are plenty of men belowdecks who could be making contributions here, but they don't come up. Daniel, beginning to get the hang of pirate-fighting, understands that van Hoek wants to hide the true size of his crew from Teach. They have been running before a north wind (though it seems to've shifted a few points westwards) for over an hour. The southern limb of Cape Cod is dead ahead, barring their path. But long before reaching the shore, Minerva would run aground in coarse brown sand. So they have to come about now and begin to work to windward, towards the open Atlantic. These simple terms – “come about,' for example – denote procedures that are as complicated and tradition-bound as the installation of a new Pope. Great big strong men are running toward the bow: the foreyard loosers and furlers, and the headsail loosers and stowers. They take up positions on the forecastledeck or shinny out onto the bowsprit, but politely step aside for the wiry foretopmen who begin their laborious ascent up the fore shrouds to work the topsails and things higher up the foremast. It is a bristling and tangled thicket of nautical detail. Like watching fifty surgeons dissect fifty different animals at once – the kind of stuff that, half a century ago, would've fascinated Daniel, sucked him into this sort of life, made him a sea-captain. But like a captain reefing and striking his sails before too strong a wind, lest it drive his ship onto the shallows, Daniel ignores as much of this as he can get away with, and tries to understand what is happening in its general outlines: Minerva is coming round toward the wind. In her wake, a mile abaft, is the sloop, her sails lying a-shiver, leaving the little ship dead in the water, drifting slowly to leeward, as pirates try to beat out flames with sopped canvas whilst not stepping on any of those caltrops. Several miles north of that, four more ships are spread out on the bay, waiting. A panic of luffing and shivering spreads through Minerva 's rig as all the sails change their relationship to the wind, then everything snaps tight, just as the sailors knew it would, and she's running as close-hauled as she can, headed northeast. In just a few minutes she's drawn abeam of that scorched sloop, which is now steaming, rather than smoking, and attempting to make sail. It's obvious that caltrops and flying crockery-shards have deranged the crew, in the sense that no man knows what to do when. So the sloop's movements are inconclusive. All the more surprising that van Hoek orders a tack, when it isn't really necessary. Minerva comes about and sails directly toward the meandering sloop. Several minutes later, Minerva bucks once as she rams the sloop amidships, then shudders as her keel drives the wreckage under the sea. Those burly forecastlemen go out with cutlasses and hatchets to cut shreds of the sloop's rigging away from the bowsprit, where it has become fouled. Van Hoek, strolling on the poop deck, aims a pistol over the rail and, in a sudden lily of smoke, speeds a drowning pirate to Hell. Royal Society Meeting, Gunfleet House 1673 'IRENEW MY OBJECTION :' said Robert Boyle. 'It does not seem respectful to inventory the contents of our Founder's guts as if they were a few keepsakes left behind in a chest – ' 'Overruled,' said John Comstock, still President of the Royal Society – just barely. 'Though, out of respect for our remarkably generous host, I will defer to him .' Thomas More Anglesey, Duke of Gunfleet, was seated at the head of his drawing-room, at a conspicuously new gilt-and-white-enamel table in the barock style. Other bigwigs, such as John Comstock, surrounded him, seated according to equally barock rules of protocol. Anglesey withdrew a large watch from the pocket of his Persian vest and held it up to the light streaming in through about half an acre of window-glass, exceptionally clear and colorless and bubble-free and recently installed. 'Can we get through it in fifty seconds ?' he inquired. Inhalations all round. In his peripheral vision, Daniel saw several old watches being stuffed into pockets – pockets that tended to be frayed, and rimmed with that nameless dark shine. But the Earl of Upnor and – of all people – Roger Comstock (who was sitting next to Daniel) reached into clean bright pockets, took out new watches, and managed to hold them up in such a way that most everyone in the room could see that each was equipped, not just with two but three hands, the third moving so quickly that you could see its progress round the dial – counting the seconds ! Many hunched glances, now, toward Robert Hooke, the Hephaestus of the tiny. Hooke managed to look as if he didn't care about how impressed everyone was – which was probably true. Daniel looked over at Leibniz, sitting there with his box on his lap, who had a soulful, distant expression. Roger Comstock, noting the same thing: 'Is that how a German looks before he bursts into tears?' Upnor, following Roger's gaze: 'Or before he pulls out his broadsword and begins mowing down Turks.' 'He deserves our credit for showing up at all,' Daniel murmured – hypnotized by the movement of Roger Comstock's second-hand. 'Word arrived yesterday – his patron died in Mainz.' 'Of embarrassment, most likely,' hissed the Earl of Upnor. A chirurgeon, looking deeply nervous and out of his depth, was chivvied up to the front of the room. It was a big room, this. Its owner, the Duke of Gunfleet, perhaps too much under the spell of his architect, insisted on calling it the Grand Salon. This was simply French for Big Big Room; but it seemed a little bigger, and ever so much grander, when the French nomenclature was used. Even under the humble appellation of Big Big Room, it was a bit too big and too grand for the chirurgeon. 'Fifty seconds! – ?' he said. There was a difficult interlude, lasting much longer than fifty seconds, as a helpful Fellow tried to explain the idea of fifty seconds to the chirurgeon, who had got stuck on the misconception that they were speaking of 1Ž52s – perhaps some idiom from the gambling world? 'Think of minutes of longitude,' someone called out from the back of the Big Big Room. 'One sixtieth of that sort of a minute is called what?' 'A second of longitude,' said the chirurgeon. 'By analogy, then, one sixtieth of a minute of time is – ' 'A second . . . of time,' said the chirurgeon; then was suddenly mortified as he ran through some rough calculations in his head. 'One thirty-six-hundredth of an hour,' called out a bored voice with a French accent. 'Time's up!' announced Boyle, 'Let us move on – ' 'The good doctor may have another fifty seconds,' Anglesey ruled. 'Thank you, my lord,' said the chirurgeon, and cleared his throat. 'Perhaps those gentlemen who have been the patrons of Mr. Hooke's horologickal researches, and are now the beneficiaries of his so ingenious handiwork, will be so kind as to keep me informed, during my presentation of the results of Lord Chester's post-mortem, as to the passage of time – ' 'I accept that charge – you have already spent twenty seconds!' said the Earl of Upnor. 'Please, Louis, let us show due respect for our Founder, and for this Doctor,' said his father. 'It seems too late for the former, Father, but I assent to the latter.' 'Hear, hear!' Boyle said. This made the chirurgeon falter – but John Comstock stiffened him up with a look. 'Most of Lord Chester's organs were normal for a man of his age,' the chirurgeon said. 'In one kidney I found two small stones. In the ureter, some gravel. Thank you.' The chirurgeon sat down very hastily, like an infantryman who has just seen puffs of smoke bloom from the powder-pans of opposing muskets. Buzzing and droning filled the room – suddenly it was like one of Wilkins's glass apiaries, and the chirurgeon a boy who'd poked it with a stick. But the Queen Bee was dead, and there was disagreement as to who was going to be stung. 'It is what I suspected – there was no stoppage of urine,' Hooke finally announced, 'only pain from small kidney-stones. Pain that induced Lord Chester to take solace in opiates.' Which was as good as flinging a glass of water in the face of Monsieur LeFebure. The King's Chymist stood up. 'To have given comfort to the Lord Bishop of Chester in his time of need is the greatest honor of my career,' he said. 'It would be an infamous shame if any of those other medicines he took, led to his demise.' Now a great deal more buzzing, in a different key. Roger Comstock stood up and cut through it: 'If Mr. Pepys would be so kind as to show us his stone . . .' Pepys fairly erupted to his feet across the room and shoved a hand into a pregnant pocket. John Comstock sent both men back down with cast-iron eyes. 'It would not be a kindness, Mr., er, Comstock, as we've all seen it.' Daniel's turn. 'Mr. Pepys's stone is colossal – yet he was able to urinate a little.Considering the smallness of the urinary passages, is it not possible that a small stone might block urine as well as a large one – and perhaps better ?' No more buzzing now, but a deep general murmur – the point was awarded, by acclamation, to Daniel. He sat down. Roger Comstock ejaculated compliments all over him. 'I've had stones in the kidney,' Anglesey said, 'and I will testify that the pain is beyond description.' John Comstock: 'Like something meted out by the Popish Inquisition ?' 'I cannot make out what is going on,' said Daniel, quietly, to his neighbor. 'Well, you'd best make it out before you say anything else,' Roger said. 'Just a suggestion.' 'First Anglesey and Comstock are united in disgracing Wilkins's memory – then next moment, at each other's throats over religion.' 'Where does that put you, Daniel?' Roger asked. Anglesey, unruffled: 'I'm sure I speak for the entire Royal Society in expressing unbounded gratitude to Monsieur LeFebure for easing Lord Chester's final months.' 'The Elixir Proprietalis LeFebure is greatly admired at Court – even among young ladies who are not afflicted with exquisitely painful disorders,' said John Comstock. 'Some of them like it so well that they have started a new fashion: going to sleep, and never waking up again.' The conversation had now taken on the semblance of a lawn-tennis match played with sputtering granadoes. There was a palpable shifting of bodies and chairs as Fellows of the R.S. aligned themselves for spectation. Monsieur LeFebure caught Comstock's lob with perfect aplomb: 'It has been known since ancient times that syrup of poppies, in even small doses, cripples the judgment by day and induces frightful dreams by night:would you not agree?' Here John Comstock, sensing a trap, said nothing. But Hooke answered, 'I can attest to that.' 'Your dedication to Truth is an example to us all, Mr. Hooke. In large doses, of course, the medicine kills.The first symptom – destruction of judgment – can lead to the second:death by over-dosing. That is why the Elixir Proprietalis LeFebure should only be administered under my supervision – and that is why I have personally taken pains to visit Lord Chester several times each week, during the months that his judgment was crippled by the drug.' Comstock was annoyed by LeFebure's resilience. But (as Daniel realized too late) Comstock had another goal in sight besides denting LeFebure's reputation, and it was a goal that he shared with Thomas More Anglesey – normally his rival and enemy. A look passed between these two. Daniel stood. Roger got a grip on his sleeve, but was not in a position to reach his tongue. 'I saw Lord Chester several times in his final weeks and saw no evidence that his mental faculties were affected! To the contrary – ' 'Lest someone come away with the foolish opinion that you are being unkind, Monsieur LeFebure,' Anglesey said – shooting a glare at Daniel – “did Lord Chester not consider this mental impairment a fair price to pay for the opportunity to spend a few last months with his family?' 'Oh, he paid that price gladly, ' Monsieur LeFebure said. 'I collect that this is why we've heard so little from him in the way of Natural Philosophy of late – ' Comstock said. 'Yes – and it is why we should overlook any of his more recent, er . . .' 'Indiscretions?' 'Enthusiasms?' 'Impulsive ventures into the lower realm of politics:' 'His mental powers dimmed – his heart was as pure as ever – and sought solace in well-meaning gestures.' That was all the poisoned eulogies Daniel could stand to hear – then he was out in the garden of Gunfleet House watching a white marble mermaid vomit an endless stream of clear babble into a fish-pond. Roger Comstock was right behind him. There were marble benches a-plenty, but he could not sit. Rage had taken him. Daniel was not especially susceptible to that passion. But he understood, now, why the Greeks had believed that Furies were angels of a sort, winged-swift, armed with whips and torches, rushing up out of Erebus to goad men unto madness. Roger, watching Daniel pace around the garden, might have convinced himself that his friend's wild lunges and strides were being provoked by invisible lashes, and that his face had been scorched by torches. 'O for a sword,' Daniel said. 'Aw, you'd be dead right away if you tried that!' 'I know that, Roger. Some would say there are worse things than being dead. Thank god Jeffreys wasn't in the room – to see me running out of it like a thief!' And here his voice choked and tears rushed to his eyes. For this was the worst part. That in the end he had done nothing – nothing – except run out of the Grand Salon. 'You're clever, but you don't know what to do,' Roger said. 'I'm the other way round. We complement each other.' Daniel was annoyed. Then he reflected that to be the complement of a man with as many deficiencies as Roger Comstock was a high distinction. He turned and looked the other up and down, perhaps with an eye towards punching him in the nose. Roger was not so much wearing his wig as embedded in its lower reaches, and it was perfect – the sort of wig that had its own staff. Daniel, even if he were the punching sort, could not bring himself to ruin anything so perfect. 'You are too modest, Roger – obviously you've gone out and done something clever.' 'Oh, you've noticed my attire! I hope you don't think it's foppish.' 'I think it's expensive. ' 'For one of the Golden Comstocks, you mean . . .' Roger came closer. Daniel kept being cruel to Roger, trying to make him go away, but Roger took it as honesty, implying profound friendship. 'Well, in any case it is certainly an improvement on your appearance the last time I saw you.' Daniel was referring to the explosion in the laboratory, which was now far enough in the past that both Daniel and Roger had their eyebrows back. He had not seen Roger since that night because Isaac, upon coming back to find the lab blown up, had fired him, and sent him packing, not just out of the laboratory, but out of Cambridge. Thus had ended a scholarly career that had probably needed to be put out of its misery in any case. Daniel knew not whither their Cinderella had fled, but he appeared to have done well there. Roger plainly had no idea what Daniel was talking about. 'I don't recall that – did you meet me in the street, before I left for Amsterdam? I probably did look wretched then.' Daniel now tried the Leibnizian experiment of rehearsing the explosion in the laboratory from Roger's point of view. Roger had been working in the dark: a necessity, as any open flame might set fire to the gunpowder. And not much of an inconvenience, since what he'd been up to was dead simple: grinding the powder in a mortar and dumping it into a bag. Both the sound, and the feel of the pestle in his hand, would tell when the powder had been ground to a fine enough consistency for whatever purpose Roger had in mind. So he had worked blind. Light was the one thing he prayed he wouldn't see, for it would mean a spark that would be certain to ignite the powder. Attent on work and worry, he had never known that Daniel had come back to the house – why should he, since he was supposed to be watching a play? And Roger had not yet heard the applause and the distant murmur of voices that would signal its end. Roger had never heard Daniel's approach, for Daniel, who'd phant'sied he was stalking a rat, had been at pains to move as quietly as possible. The heavy fabric screen had blocked the light of Daniel's candle to the point where it was no brighter than the ambient furnace-glow. Suddenly the candle-flame had been in Roger's face. In other circumstances he'd've known it for what it was; but standing there with a sack of gunpowder in his hands, he had taken it for what he'd most dreaded: a spark. He had dropped the mortar and the bag and flung himself back as quick as he could. The explosion had followed in the next instant. He could neither have seen nor heard anything until after he'd fled the building. So there was no ground to suppose he had ever registered as much as the faintest impression of Daniel's presence. He'd not seen Daniel since. And so Daniel was presented with a choice between telling Roger the truth, and assenting to the lie that Roger had conveniently proffered: namely, that Daniel had spied Roger in the street before Roger had departed for Amsterdam. Telling the truth held no danger, so far as he could see. The lie was attended with a small peril that Roger – who was cunning, in a way – might be dangling it before him as some sort of test. 'I thought you knew,' Daniel said, 'I was in the laboratory when it happened. Had gone there to fetch Isaac's paper on tangents. Nearly got blown to bits myself!' Astonishment and revelation came out of Roger's face like sudden flame. But if Daniel had owned a Hooke watch, he would have counted only a few seconds of time before the old look came back down over his face. As when a candle-snuffer pounces on a wild flame and the errant brilliance that had filled one's vision a moment ago is in an instant vanished, the only thing left in its place a dull sight of old silver-work, frozen and familiar. 'I phant'sied I'd heard someone moving about in there!' Roger exclaimed. Which was obviously a lie; but it made the conversation move along better. Daniel was keen to ask Roger what he'd been doing with the gunpowder. But perhaps it would be better to wait for Roger to volunteer something. 'So it was to Amsterdam you went, to recuperate from the excitements of that evening,' Daniel said. 'Here first.' 'Here to London?' 'Here to the Angleseys'. Lovely family. And socializing with them has its benefits.' Roger reached up as if to stroke his wig – but dared not touch it. 'What, you're not in their employ:?' 'No, no! It's much better. I know things. Certain of the Golden Comstocks immigrated – all right, all right, some would say fled – to Holland in the last century. Settled in Amsterdam. I went and paid them a visit. From them, I knew that de Ruyter was taking his fleet to Guinea to seize the Duke of York's slave-ports. So I sold my Guinea Company shares while they were still high. Then from the Angleseys I learned that King Looie was making preparations to invade the Dutch Republic – but could never stage a campaign without purchasing grain first – purchasing it you'll never guess where. ' 'No!' 'Just so – the Dutch sold France the grain that King Looie is using to conquer them! At any rate – I took my money from the Guinea Company shares, and took a large position in Amsterdam-grain just before King Looie bid the price up! Voilà! Now I've a Hooke-watch, a big wig, and a lot on fashionable Waterhouse Square!' 'You own – ' Daniel began, and was well on his way to saying You own some of my family estate!? when they were interrupted by Leibniz, stalking through a flower-bed, hugging his brain-in-a-box. 'Dr. Leibniz – the Royal Society were quite taken with your Arithmetickal Engine,' Roger said. 'But they did not like my mathematickal proofs,' said one dejected German savant. 'On the contrary – they were acknowledged to be unusually elegant!' Daniel protested. 'But there is no honor in elegantly proving a theorem in 1672 that some Scotsman proved barbarously in 1671!' 'You could not possibly have known that,' Daniel said. 'Happens all the time,' said Roger, a-bristle with bogus authority. 'Monsieur Huygens should have known, when he assigned me those problems as exercises,' Leibniz grumbled. 'He probably did, ' Daniel said. 'Oldenburg writes to him every week.' 'It is well-known that GRUBENDOL is a trafficker in foreign intelligence!' announced Robert Hooke, crashing through a laurel bush and tottering onto a marble bench as vertigo seized him. Daniel gritted his teeth, waiting for a fist-fight, or worse, to break out between Hooke and Leibniz, but Leibniz let this jab at Oldenburg pass without comment, as if Hooke had merely farted at High Table. 'Another way of phrasing it might be that Mr. Oldenburg keeps Monsieur Huygens abreast of the latest developments from England,' Roger said. Daniel picked up the thread: 'Huygens probably heard about the latest English theorems through that channel, and gave them to you, Doctor Leibniz, to test your mettle!' 'Never anticipating,' Roger tidily concluded, 'that fortunes of War and Diplomacy would bring you to the Britannic shore, where you would innocently present the same results to the Royal Society!' 'Entirely the fault of Oldenburg – who steals my latest watch-designs, and despatches 'em to that same Huygens!' Hooke added. 'Nonetheless – for me to present theorems to the Royal Society – only to have some gentleman in a kilt stand up in the back of the room, and announce that he proved the same thing a year ago – ' 'Everyone who matters knows it was innocent.' 'It is a blow to my reputation.' 'Your reputation will outshine any, when you finish that Arithmetickal Engine!' announced Oldenburg, coming down a path like a blob of mercury in a trough. 'Any on the Continent, perhaps,' Hooke sniffed. 'But all of the Frenchmen who are competent to realize my conception, are consumed with vain attempts to match the work of Mr. Hooke!' Leibniz returned. Which was a reasonably professional bit of flattery, the sort of thing that greased wheels and made reputations in small Continental courts. Oldenburg rolled his eyes, then straightened abruptly as a stifled belch pistoned up his gorge. Hooke said, 'I have a design for an arithmetickal engine of my own, which I have not had the leisure to complete yet.' 'Yes – but do you have a design for what you shall do with it, when it's finished?' Leibniz asked eagerly. 'Calculate logarithms, I suppose, and outmode Napier's bones . . .' 'But why concern yourself with anything so tedious as logarithms!?' 'They are a tool – nothing more.' 'And for what purpose do you wish to use that tool, sir?' Leibniz asked eagerly. 'If I believed that my answer would remain within the walls of this fair garden, Doctor, I would say – but as matters stand, I fear my words will be carried to Paris with the swiftness – though surely not the grace – of the winged-footed messenger of the gods.' Staring directly at Oldenburg. Leibniz deflated. Oldenburg stepped closer to him, whilst turning his back on Hooke, and began trying to cheer the Doctor up – which only depressed him more, as being claimed, by Oldenburg, as an ally, would condemn him forever in Hooke's opinion. Hooke removed a long slim deerskin wallet from his breast pocket and unrolled it on his lap. It contained a neat row of slim objects: diverse quills and slivers of cane. He selected a tendril of whalebone – set the wallet aside – spread his knees wide – leaned forward – inserted the whalebone deep into his throat – wiggled it – and immediately began to vomit up bile. Daniel watched with an empiric eye, until he had made sure the vomit contained no blood, parasites, or other auspices of serious trouble. Oldenburg was muttering to Leibniz in High-Dutch, of which Daniel could not understand a single word – which was probably why. But Daniel could make out a few names: first of Leibniz's late patron in Mainz, and then of various Parisians, such as Colbert. He turned round hoping to continue his conversation with Roger, but Roger had quietly removed himself to make way for his distant cousin the Earl of Epsom – who was stalking directly toward Daniel looking as if he would be happy to settle matters with a head-butting duel. 'Mr. Waterhouse.' 'My Lord.' 'You loved John Wilkins.' 'Almost as a father, my lord.' 'You would have him revered and respected by future generations of Englishmen.' 'I pray that Englishmen will have the wisdom and discernment to give Wilkins his due.' 'I say to you that those Englishmen will dwell in a country with one Established Church. If, God willing, I have my way, it will be Anglican. If the Duke of Gunfleet has his, it will be the Roman faith. Deciding which might require another Civil War, or two, or three. I might kill Gunfleet, Gunfleet might kill me – my sons or grandsons might cross swords with his. And despite these fatal differences, he and I are as one in the conviction that no nation can exist without one Established Church. Do you imagine that a few Phanatiques can overcome the combined power of all the world's Epsoms and Gunfleets?' 'I was never one for vain imaginings, my lord.' 'Then you admit that England will have an Established Church.' 'I confess it is likely.' 'Then what does that make those who stand in opposition to an Established Church?' 'I don't know, my lord – eccentric Bishops?' 'On the contrary – it makes them heretics and traitors, Mr. Waterhouse. To change a heretic and a traitor into an eccentric Bishop is no mean task – it is a form of Transmutation requiring many Alchemists – hooded figures working in secret. The last thing they need is for a sorcerer's apprentice to stumble in and begin knocking things over!' 'Please forgive my ineptitude, my lord. I responded impulsively, because I thought he was being attacked.' ' Hewas not being attacked, Mr. Waterhouse – youwere.' DANIEL LEFT ANGLESEY HOUSE and wandered blindly along Piccadilly, realized he was in front of Comstock House, veered away from that, and fled into St. James's Fields – now parted into neat little squares where grass was trying to establish itself on the muck of construction. He sat on a plank bench, and slowly became aware that Roger Comstock had been following him the entire way, and that he'd (presumably) been talking the entire time. But he pointedly declined to bring his breeches into contact with the bench, a splintery improvisation strewn with pasty-flakes, pipe-ashes, and rat-shite. 'What were Leibniz and Oldenburg on about? Is German among the many things that you understand, Daniel?' 'I think it was that Dr. Leibniz has lost his patron, and needs a new one – with any luck, in Paris.' 'Oh, most difficult for such a man to make his way in the world without a patron!' 'Yes.' 'It seems as if John Comstock is cross with you.' 'Very.' 'His son is captain of one of the invasion-ships, you know. He is nervous, irritable just now – not himself.' 'On the contrary, I think I have just seen the real John Comstock. It's safe to say that my career in the Royal Society is at an end – as long as he remains President.' 'Informed opinion is that the Duke of Gunfleet will be president after the next election.' 'That's no better – for in their hatred of me, Epsom and Gunfleet are one man.' 'Sounds as though you need a patron, Daniel. One who sympathizes.' ' Isthere anyone who sympathizes?' 'I do.' This took a while to stop seeming funny, and to percolate inwards. The two of them sat there silently for a while. Some sort of parade or procession seemed to be headed this general direction from Charing Cross, with beating of drums, and either bad singing or melodious jeering. Daniel and Roger got up and began wandering down towards Pall Mall, to see what it was. 'Are you making me some sort of proposal?' Daniel finally asked. 'I made a penny or two this year – still, I'm far from being an Epsom or a Gunfleet! I put most of my liquid capital into buying that parcel of land from your brothers . . .' 'Which one is it?' 'The large one on the corner there, just next to where Mr. Raleigh Waterhouse built his house . . . what think you of it, by the way?' 'Raleigh's house? It's, er . . . big, I suppose.' 'Would you like to put it in the shade?' 'What can you possibly mean?' 'I want to erect a bigger house. But I didn't study my mathematics at Trinity, as you know only too well, Daniel – I need you to design it for me, and oversee the construction.' 'But I'm not an architect – ' 'Neither was Mr. Hooke, before he was hired to design Bedlam and diverse other great Fabricks – you can bang out a house as well as he, I wager – and certainly better than that block-head who slapped Raleigh's together.' They'd come out into Pall Mall, which was lined with pleasant houses. Daniel was already eyeing their windows and roof-lines, collecting ideas. But Roger kept his eye on the procession, which was nearly upon them: several hundred more or less typical Londoners, albeit with a higher than usual number of Dissident, and even a few Anglican, preachers. They were carrying an effigy, dangling from the top of a long pole: a straw man dressed in ecclesiastical robes, but whorishly colored and adorned, with a huge mitre affixed to his head, and a long bishop's crook lashed to one mitt. The Pope. Daniel and Roger stood to one side and watched for (according to Roger's watch) a hundred and thirty-four seconds as the crowd marched by them and drained out of the street into St. James's Park. They chose a place in clear view of both St. James's Palace and Whitehall Palace, and planted the pole in the dirt. Soldiers were already headed toward them from the Horse Guards' compound between the two Palaces: a few forerunners on horseback, but mostly formations of infantrymen that had spilled out too hastily to form up into proper squares. These were in outlandish fantastickal attire, with long peaked caps of a vaguely Polish style.*Daniel at first took them for dragoons, but as they marched closer he could see nippled cannonballs – granadoes! – dangling from their ox-hide belts and bandoliers, thudding against their persons with each step. That detail was not lost on the crowd of marchers, either. After a few hasty words, they held torches to the hem of the Pope's robe and set it afire. Then the crowd burst, granadoe-like. By the time those grenadiers arrived, the procession had been re-absorbed by London. There was nothing for the grenadiers to do but knock the effigy down and stamp out the flames – keeping them well away from the grenades, of course. “ 'Twas well-conceived,' was Roger Comstock's verdict. 'Those were Royal Guards – the Duke of York's new regiment. Oh, they're commanded by John Churchill, but make no mistake, they are York's men.' 'What on earth do you mean when you say something like this was well-conceived? I mean, you sound like a connoisseur sipping the latest port.' 'Well, that Mobb could've burnt the Pope anywhere, couldn't they? But they chose here. Why here? Couldn't've chosen a more dangerous place, what with Grenadiers so near to hand. Well, the answer of course is that they wished to send a message to the Duke of York . . . to wit, that if he doesn't renounce his Papist ways, next time they'll be burning him in effigy – if not in person.' 'Even I could see, that night at Cambridge, that Gunfleet and the younger Angleseys are the new favorites at Court,' Daniel said. 'While Epsom is lampooned in plays, and his house besieged by the Mobb.' 'Not so remarkable really, given the rumors . . .' 'What rumors?' Daniel almost added I am not the sort of person who hears or heeds such things, but just now it was difficult to be so haughty. 'That our indifferent fortune in the war is chargeable to faulty cannon, and bad powder.' 'What a marvellously convenient excuse for failure in war!' Until that moment Daniel had not heard anyone say aloud that the war was going badly. The very idea that the English and the French together could not best a few Dutchmen was absurd on its face. Yet, now that Roger had mentioned it, there was a lack of good news, obvious in retrospect. Of course people would be looking for someone to blame. 'The cannon that burst at the ‘Siege of Maestricht,'' Daniel said, 'do you reckon 'twas shoddy goods? Or was it a scheme laid by Epsom's enemies?' 'He has enemies,' was all Roger would say. ' ThatI see,' said Daniel, 'and, too, I see that the Duke of Gunfleet is one of them, and that he, and other Papists, like the Duke of York, are a great power in the land. What I do not understand is why those two enemies, Epsom and Gunfleet, a few minutes ago were as one man in heaping obloquy on the memory of John Wilkins.' 'Epsom and Gunfleet are like two captains disputing command of a ship, each calling the other a mutineer,' Roger explained. 'The ship, in this similitude, is the Realm with its established church – Anglican or Papist, depending on as Epsom's or Gunfleet's faction prevails. There is a third faction belowdecks – dangerous chaps, well organized and armed, but, most unnervingly, under no distinct leader at the moment. When these Dissidents, as they are called, say, ‘Down with the Pope!' it is music to the ears of the Anglicans, whose church is founded on hostility to all things Romish. When they say, ‘Down with forced Uniformity, let Freedom of Conscience prevail,' it gladdens the hearts of the Papists, who cannot practice their faith under that Act of Uniformity that Epsom wrote. And so at different times both Epsom's and Gunfleet's factions phant'sy the Dissidents as allies. But when the Dissidents question the idea of an Established Church, and propose to make the whole country an Amsterdam, why then it seems to the leaders of both factions that these Dissident madmen are lighting fuzes on powder-kegs to blow up the ship itself. And then they unite to crush the Dissidents.' 'So you are saying that Wilkins's legacy, the Declaration of Indulgence, is a powder-keg to them.' 'It is a fuze that might, for all they know, lead to a powder-keg. They must stomp it out.' 'Stomping on me as well.' 'Only because you presented yourself to be stomped in the stupidest possible way – by your leave, by your leave.' 'Well, what ought I to've done, when they were attacking him so?' 'Bit your tongue and bided your time,' Roger said. 'Things can change in a second. Behold this Pope-burning! Led by Dissidents, against Papists. If you, Daniel, had marched at the head of that Mobb, why, Epsom would feel you were on his side against Anglesey.' 'Just what I need – the Duke of Gunfleet as personal enemy.' 'Then prate about Freedom of Conscience! That is the excellence of your position, Daniel – if you would only open your eyes to it. Through nuances and shifts so subtle as to be plausibly deniable, you may have either Epsom or Gunfleet as your ally at any given moment.' 'It sounds cavilling and pusillanimous,' said Daniel, summoning up some words from the tables of the Philosophick Language. Without disagreeing, Roger said: 'It is the key to achieving what Drake dreamed of.' 'How!? When all the power is in the hands of the Angleseys and the Silver Comstocks.' 'Very soon you shall see how wrong you are in that.' 'Oh? Is there some other source of power I am not aware of?' 'Yes,' said Roger, 'and your uncle Thomas Ham's cellar is full of it.' 'But that gold is not his. It is the sum of his obligations.' 'Just so! You have put your finger on it! There is hope for you,' Roger said, and stepped back from the bench preparatory to taking leave. 'I hope that you will consider my proposal in any event . . . Sir.' 'Consider it under consideration, Sir.' 'And even if there is no time in your life for houses – perhaps I could beg a few hours for my theatre – ' 'Did you say theatre ?' 'I've bought part interest in one, yes – the King's Comedians play there – we produced Love in a Tub and The Lusty Chirurgeon.From time to time, we need help making thunder and lightning, as well as demonic apparitions, angelic visitations, impalements, sex-changes, hangings, live births, et cetera .' 'Well, I don't know what my family would think of my being involved in such things, Roger.' 'Poh! Look at what they have been up to! Now that the Apocalypse has failed to occur, Daniel, you must find something to do with your several talents.' 'I suppose the least I could to is keep you from blowing yourself to pieces.' 'I can hide nothing from you, Daniel. Yes. You have divined it. That evening in the laboratory, I was making powder for theatrickal squibs. When you grind it finer, you see, it burns faster – more flash, more bang.' 'I noticed,' Daniel said. Which made Roger laugh; which made Daniel feel happy. And so into a sort of spiral they went. 'I've an appointment to meet Dr. Leibniz at a coffee-house in the theatre district later . . . so why don't we walk in that direction now?' Daniel said. 'PERHAPS YOU MIGHT HAVE STUMBLED across my recent monograph, On the Incarnation of God . . .' 'Oldenburg mentioned it,' Daniel said, 'but I must confess that I have never attempted to read it.' 'During our last conversation, we spoke of the difficulty of reconciling a mechanical philosophy with free will. This problem has any number of resonances with the theological question of incarnation.' 'In that both have to do with spiritual essences being infused into bodies that are in essence mechanical,' Daniel said agreeably. All around them, fops and theatre-goers were edging away towards other tables, leaving Leibniz and Waterhouse with a pleasant clear space in the midst of what was otherwise a crowded coffee-house. 'The problem of the Trinity is the mysterious union of the divine and human natures of Christ. Likewise, when we debate whether a mechanism – such as a fly drawn to the smell of meat, or a trap, or an arithmetickal engine – is thinking by itself, or merely displaying the ingenuity of its creator, we are asking whether or not those engines have, in some sense, been imbued with an incorporeal principle or, vulgarly, spirit that, like God or an angel, possesses free will.' 'Again, I hear an echo of the Scholastics in your words – ' 'But Mr. Waterhouse, you are making the common mistake of thinking that we must have Aristotle or Descartes – that the two philosophies are irreconcilable. On the contrary! We may accept modern, mechanistic explanations in physics, while retaining Aristotle's concept of self-sufficiency.' 'Forgive me for being skeptical of that – ' 'It is your responsibility to be skeptical, Mr. Waterhouse, no forgiveness is needed. The details of how these two concepts may be reconciled are somewhat lengthy – suffice it to say that I have found a way to do it, by assuming that every body contains an incorporeal principle, which I identify with cogitatio.' 'Thought.' 'Yes!' 'Where is this principle to be found? The Cartesians think it's in the pineal gland – ' 'It is not spread out through space in any such vulgar way – but the organization that it causes is distributed throughout the body – it informs the body – and we may know that it exists, by observing that information. What is the difference between a man who has just died, and one who is going to die in a few ticks of Mr. Hooke's watch?' 'The Christian answer is that one has a soul, and the other does not.' 'And it is a fine answer – it needs only to be translated into a new Philosophical Language, as it were.' 'You would translate it, Doctor, by stating that the living body is informed by this organizing principle – which is the outward and visible sign that the mechanical body is, for the time being anyway, unified with an incorporeal principle called Thought.' 'That is correct. Do you recall our discussion of symbols? You admitted that your mind cannot manipulate a spoon directly – instead it must manipulate a symbol of the spoon, inside the mind. God could manipulate the spoon directly, and we would name it a miracle. But created minds cannot – they need a passive element through which to act.' 'The body.' 'Yes.' 'But you say that Cogitatio and Computation are the same, Doctor – in the Philosophical Language, a single word would suffice for both.' 'I have concluded that they are one and the same.' 'But your Engine does computation. And so I am compelled to ask, at what point does it become imbued with the incorporeal principle of Thought? You say that Cogitatio informs the body, and somehow organizes it into a mechanical system that is capable of acting. I will accept that for now. But with the Arithmetickal Engine, you are working backwards – constructing a mechanical system in the hopes that it will become impregnated from above – as the Holy Virgin. When does the Annunciation occur – at the moment you put the last gear into place? When you turn the crank?' 'You are too literal-minded,' Leibniz said. 'But you have told me that you see no conflict between the notion that the mind is a mechanickal device, and a belief in free will. If that is the case, then there must be some point at which your Arithmetickal Engine will cease to be a collection of gears, and become the body into which some angelic mind has become incarnated.' 'It is a false dichotomy!' Leibniz protested. 'An incorporeal principle alone would not give us free will. If we accept – as we must – that God is omniscient, and has foreknowledge of all events that will occur in the future, then He knows what we will do before we do it, and so – even if we be angels – we cannot be said to have free will.' 'That's what I was always taught in church. So the prospects for your philosophy seem dismal, Doctor – free will seems untenable both on grounds of theology and of Natural Philosophy.' 'So you say, Mr. Waterhouse – and yet you agree with Hooke that there is a mysterious consonance between the behavior of Nature, and the workings of the human mind. Why should that be?' 'I haven't the faintest idea, Doctor. Unless, as the Alchemists have it, all matter – Nature and our brains together – are suffused by the same Philosophick Mercury.' 'A hypothesis neither one of us loves.' 'What is your hypothesis, Doctor?' 'Like two arms of a snowflake, Mind and Matter grew out of a common center – and even though they grew independently and without communicating – each developing according to its own internal rules – nevertheless they grew in perfect harmony, and share the same shape and structure.' 'It is rather Metaphysickal,' was all Daniel could come back with. 'What's the common center? God?' 'God arranged things from the beginning so that Mind could understand Nature. But He did not do this by continual meddling in the development of Mind, and the unfolding of the Universe . . . rather He fashioned the nature of both Mind and Nature to be harmonious from the beginning.' 'So, I have complete freedom of action . . . but God knows in advance what I will do, because it is my nature to act in harmony with the world, and God partakes of that harmony.' 'Yes.' 'It is odd that we should be having this conversation, Doctor, because during the last few days, for the first time in my life, I have felt as if certain possibilities have been set before me, which I may reach out and grasp if I so choose.' 'You sound like a man who has found a patron.' The notion of Roger Comstock as patron made Daniel's gorge rise a bit. But he could not deny Leibniz's insight. 'Perhaps.' 'I am pleased, for your sake. The death of my patron has left me with very few choices.' 'There must be some nobleman in Paris who appreciates you, Doctor.' 'I was thinking rather of going to Leiden to stay with Spinoza.' 'But Holland is soon to be overrun . . . you could not pick a worse place to be.' 'The Dutch Republic has enough shipping to carry two hundred thousand persons out of Europe, and around the Cape of Good Hope to the furthermost islands of Asia, far out of reach of France.' 'That is entirely too phantastickal for me to believe.' 'Believe. The Dutch are already making plans for this. Remember, they made half of their land with the labor of their hands! What they did once in Europe, they can do again in Asia. If the last ditch is stormed, and the United Provinces fall under the heel of King Louis, I intend to be there, and I will board ship and go to Asia and help build a new Commonwealth – like the New Atlantis that Francis Bacon described.' 'For you, sir, such an adventure might be possible. For me, it can never be anything more than a romance,' Daniel said. 'Until now, I've always done what I had to, and this went along very well with the Predestination that was taught me. But now I may have choices to make, and they are choices of a practical nature.' 'Whatever acts, cannot be destroyed,' said the Doctor. Daniel went out the door of the coffee-house and walked up and down London for the rest of the day. He was a bit like a comet, ranging outwards in vast loops, but continually drawn back toward certain fixed poles: Gresham's College, Waterhouse Square, Cromwell's head, and the ruin of St. Paul's. Hooke was a greater Natural Philosopher than he, but Hooke was busy rebuilding the city, and half-deranged with imaginary intrigues. Newton was also greater, but he was lost in Alchemy and poring over the Book of Revelation. Daniel had supposed that there might be an opportunity to slip between those two giants and make a name for himself. But now there was a third giant. A giant who, like the others, was distracted by the loss of his patron, and dreams of a free Commonwealth in Asia. But he would not be distracted forever. It was funny in a painful way. God had given him the desire to be a great Natural Philosopher – then put him on earth in the midst of Newton, Hooke, and Leibniz. Daniel had the training to be a minister, and the connections to find a nice congregation in England or Massachusetts. He could walk into that career as easily as he walked into a coffee-house. But his ramble kept bringing him back to the vast ruin of St. Paul's – a corpse in the middle of a gay dinner-party – and not just because it was centrally located. Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) AboardMinerva, Cape Cod Bay, Massachusetts NOVEMBER 1713 These in thir dark Nativitie the Deep Shall yield us pregnant with infernal flame, Which into hallow Engins long and round Thick-rammed, at th' other bore with touch of fire Dilated and infuriate shall send forth From far with thundring noise among our foes Such implements of mischief as shall dash To pieces, and oerwhelm whatever stands Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmd The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt. – MILTON, Paradise Lost SNATCHING A FEW MINUTES' REST in his cabin between engagements, Daniel's mood is grave. It is the solemnity, not of a man who's involved in a project to kill other men (they've been doing that all day, for Christ's sake!), but of one who's gambling his own life on certain outcomes. Or having it gambled for him by a Captain who shows signs of – what's a diplomatic way to put it – having a rich and complicated inner life. Of course, whenever you board ship you put your life in the Captain's hands – but – Someone is laughing up there on the poop deck. The gaiety clashes with Daniel's somber mood and annoys him. It's a derisive and somewhat cruel laugh, but not without sincere merriment. Daniel's looking about for something hard and massive to thump on the ceiling when he realizes it's van Hoek, and what has him all in a lather is some sort of technical Dutch concept – the Zog. Trundling noises from the upperdeck,*and all of a sudden Minerva 's a different ship: heeling over quite a bit more than she was, but also rolling from side much more ponderously. Daniel infers that a momentous shifting of weights has occurred. Getting up, and going back out on the quarterdeck, he sees it's true: there are several short bulbous carronnades here – nothing more or less than multi-ton blunderbusses, with large-bore, short-range, miserable accuracy. But (not to put too fine a point on it) large bores, into which gunners are shoveling all manner of messy ironmongery: pairs of cannonballs chained together, nails, redundant crowbars, clusters of grapeshot piled on sabots and tied together with ostentatiously clever sailors' knots. Once loaded, the carronnades are being run out to the gunwales – hugely increasing the ship's moment of inertia, accounting for the change in the roll period – 'Calculating our odds, Dr. Waterhouse?' Dappa inquires, descending a steep stair from the poop deck. 'What means Zog, Dappa, and why's it funny?' Dappa gets an alert look about him as if it isn't funny at all, and points across half a mile of open water toward a schooner flying a black flag with a white hourglass. The schooner is on the weather bow*parallelling their course but obviously hoping to converge, and grapple, with Minerva in the near future. 'See how miserably they make headway? We are outpacing them, even though we haven't raised the mainsail.' 'Yes – I was going to inquire – whyhaven't we raised it? It is the largest sail on the ship, and we are trying to go fast, are we not?' 'The mainsail is traditionally raised and worked by the gunners. Not raising it will make Teach think we are short-handed in that area, and unable to man all our cannon at one time.' 'But wouldn't it be worthwhile to tip our hand, if we could outrun that schooner?' 'We'll outrun her anyway .' 'But she wants us to draw abeam of her, does she not – that is the entire point of being a pirate – so perhaps she has thrown out drogues, and that is why she wallows along so pitiably.' 'She doesn't need to throw out drogues because of her appalling Zog. ' 'There it is again – what, I ask, is the meaning of that word?' 'Her wake, look at her wake!' Dappa says, waving his arm angrily. 'Yes – now that we are so, er, unsettlingly close, I can see that her wake's enough to capsize a whaleboat.' 'Those damned pirates have loaded so many cannon aboard, she rides far too low in the water, and so she's got a great ugly Zog. ' 'Is this meant to reassure me?' 'It is meant to answer your question.' ' Zogis Dutch for ‘wake,' then?' Dappa the linguist smiles yes. Half his teeth are white, the others made of gold. 'And a much better word it is, because it comes from zuigen which means ‘to suck.'' 'I don't follow.' 'Any seaman will tell you that a ship's wake sucks on her stern, holding her back – the bigger the wake, the greater the suck, and the slower the progress. That schooner, Doctor Waterhouse, sucks.' Angry words from van Hoek above – Dappa scurries down to the upperdeck to finish whatever errand Daniel interrupted. Daniel follows him, then goes aft, skirts the capstan, and descends a narrow staircase to the aftmost part of the gundeck. Thence he enters the room at the stern where he's been in the habit of taking his temperature measurements. He commences a perilous traversal of the room, headed towards that bank of undershot windows. To a landlubber the room would look pleasingly spacious, to Daniel it appears desperately short of handholds – meaning that as the ship rolls, Daniel stumbles for a greater distance, and builds up more speed, before colliding with anything big enough to stop him. In any case, he gets to the windows and looks down into Minerva 's Zog. She has one, to be sure, but compared to that schooner to windward, Minerva hardly sucks at all. The Bernoullis would have a field day with this – There is also a pirate-ketch converging on them from leeward, in much the same way as the schooner is doing from windward, and Daniel is fairly certain that this ketch doesn't suck much at all. He is certain he saw drogues trailing behind her. Minerva is lying dead upon the wind, which is to say, she's as close-hauled as possible – she can fall off to leeward but she cannot turn into the wind any farther. Since the ketch is to leeward – downwind of Minerva:falling away from the wind will send Minerva straight into the musket-fire and grappling-irons that are no doubt being readied on her decks and fighting-tops. But the ketch, being fore-and-aft rigged, can sail closer to the wind anyway. So even if Minerva holds her course, the ketch will be able to cut her off – driving her into the sucking (because heavily armed) schooner. All of which goes to explain Daniel's second reason for having gone to this room: it's as far from the fighting as he can get without jumping overboard. But he does not find the solace he wants, because from here he can see two additional pirate-ships gaining on them from astern, and they seem bigger and better than any of the others. An explosion, then another, then a lot of them at once – obviously something organized. Daniel's still alive, Minerva 's still afloat. He flings open the door to the gundeck but it's dark and quiet, the gunners all convened around the cannons on the larboard side – none of which has been fired. It must have been those carronnades on the upperdeck firing their loads of junk. Daniel turns round and looks out the window to see the ketch being left behind, fine on the lee quarter.*It is no longer recognizable as a ketch, though – just a hull heaped with tangled, slack rigging and freshly splintered blond wood. One of her guns sparks and something terrible comes out of it, directly towards him – big and spreading. He begins to fall down, more out of vertigo than any coherent plan. All the glass in all those windows explodes toward him, driven on a wall of buckshot. Only some of it hits him in the face, and none in the eyes – more luck than a natural philosopher can comfortably account for. The door's been flung open again, either by the blast of shot or by his falling back into it, so half of him is lying on the gundeck now. Suddenly, radiance warms his tightly closed eyelids. It could be a choir of angels, or a squadron of flaming devils, but he doesn't believe in any of that stuff. Or it could be Minerva 's powder magazine exploding – but that would involve loud noises, and the only noises he hears are the creaking and grumbling of gun-carriages being hauled forward. There's a refreshing sea breeze in his nostrils. He takes a big risk and opens his eyes. All of the gunports on the larboard side have been opened at once, and all of the cannon rolled out. Gunners are hauling on blocks and tackles, slewing their weapons this way or that – others levering the guns' butts up with crowbars and hammering wedges underneath – there are, in short, as many feverish preparations as for a royal wedding. Then fire is brought out, the roll of the ship carefully timed, and Daniel – poor Daniel doesn't think to put his hands over his ears. He hears one or two cannon-blasts before going deaf. Then it's just one four-ton iron tube after another jerking backwards as lightly as shuttlecocks. He is fairly certain that he is dead now. Other dead men are around him. They are lying on the upperdeck. A couple of sailors are sitting on Daniel's corpse, while another tortures his deceased flesh with a needle. Sewing his dismembered parts back on, closing up the breaches in his abdomen so stuff won't leak out. So this is what it felt like to have been a stray dog in the clutches of the Royal Society! As Daniel is lying flat on his back, his view is mostly skywards, though if he turns his head – an astonishing feat, for a dead man – he can see van Hoek up on the poop deck bellowing through his trumpet – which is aimed nearly straight down over the rail. 'What on earth can he be shouting at?' Daniel asks. 'Apologies, Doctor, didn't know you'd come awake,' says a Looming Column of Shadow, speaking in Dappa's voice, and stepping back to block the sun from Daniel's face. 'He's parleying with certain pirates who rowed out from Teach's flagship under a flag of truce.' 'What do they want?' 'They want you, Doctor.' 'I don't understand.' 'You're thinking too hard – there's naught to understand – it is entirely simple,' Dappa says. 'They rowed up and said, ‘Give us Dr. Waterhouse and all is forgotten.'' Dr. Waterhouse now ought to spend a long time being dumbstruck. But his stupefaction lasts only a little while. The sensation of nubby silk thread being drawn briskly through fresh holes in his flesh, makes serious reflection all but impossible. 'You'll do it – of course,' is the best he can come up with. 'Any other captain would – but whoever arranged to put you aboard, must've known about Captain van Hoek's feelings concerning pirates. Behold!' and Dappa steps out of the way to give Daniel an unobstructed view of a sight stranger than anything gawkers would pay to view at St. Bartholomew's Fair: a hammer-handed man climbing up into the rigging of a ship. That is to say that one of his arms is terminated, not by a hand, and not by a hook, but by an actual hammer. Van Hoek ascends to a suitably perilous altitude, up there alongside the colors that fly from the mizzenmast: a Dutch flag, and below it, a smaller one depicting the Ægis. After getting himself securely tangled in the shrouds – weaving limbs through rope so that his body is spliced into the rigging – he begins to pluck nails out of his mouth and drive them through the hem of each flag into the wood of the mast. It seems, now, that every sailor who's not sitting on Daniel is up in the rigging, unfurling a ludicrously vast array of sails. Daniel notes with approval that the mainsail's finally been hoisted – that charade is over. And now moreover Minerva 's height is being miraculously increased as the topmasts are telescoped upwards. An asymptotic progression of smaller and smaller trapezoids spreads out upon their frail-seeming yards. 'It's a glorious gesture for the Captain to make – now that he's sunk half of Teach's fleet,' Daniel says. 'Aye, Doctor – but not the better half,' Dappa says. The City of London 1673 A fifth doctrine, that tendeth to the dissolution of a commonwealth, is, that every private man has an absolute propriety in his goods; such, as excludeth the right of the sovereign. – HOBBES, Leviathan DANIEL HAD NEVER been an actor on a stage, of course, but when he went to plays at Roger Comstock's theatre – especially when he saw them for the fifth or sixth time – he was struck by the sheer oddity of these men (and women!) standing about on a platform prating the words of a script for the hundredth time and trying to behave as if hundreds of persons weren't a few yards away goggling at them. It was strangely mannered, hollow, and false, and all who took part in it secretly wanted to strike the show and move on to something new. Thus London during this the Third Dutch War, waiting for news of the Fall of Holland. As they waited, they had to content themselves with such smaller bits of news as from time to time percolated in from the sea. All London passed these rumors around and put on a great pompous show of reacting to them, as actors observe a battle or storm said to be taking place off-stage. Queerly – or perhaps not – the only solace for most Londoners was going to the theatre, where they could sit together in darkness and watch their own behavior reflected back to them. Once More into the Breeches had become very popular since its Trinity College debut. It had to be performed in Roger Comstock's theatre after its first and second homes were set on fire owing to lapses in judgment on the part of the pyrotechnicians. Daniel's job was to simulate lightning-flashes, thunderbolts, and the accidental detonation of Lord Brimstone without burning down Roger's investment. He invented a new thunder-engine, consisting of a cannonball rolling down a Spiral of Archimedes in a wooden barrel, and he abused his privileges at the world's leading alchemical research facility to formulate a new variant of gunpowder that made more flash and less bang. The pyrotechnics lasted for a few minutes, at the beginning of the play. The rest of the time he got to sit backstage and watch Tess, who always dazzled him like a fistful of flash-powder going off right in the face, and made his heart feel like a dented cannonball tumbling down an endless hollow Screw. King Charles came frequently to watch his Nellie sing her pretty songs, and so Daniel took some comfort – or amusement at least – in knowing that he and the King both endured this endless Wait in the same way: gazing at the cheeks of pretty girls. The small bits of news that did come in, while they waited for the big one, took various forms at first, but as the war went on they seemed to consist mostly of death-notices. It was not quite like living in London during the Plague; but more than once, Daniel had to choose between two funerals going on at the same hour. Wilkins had been the first. Many more followed, as if the Bishop of Chester had launched a fad. Richard Comstock, the eldest son of John, and the model for the stalwart if dim Eugene Stopcock in Breeches, was on a ship that was part of a fleet that fell under the guns of Admiral de Ruyter at Sole Bay. Along with thousands of other Englishmen, he went to David Jones's Locker. Many of the survivors could now be seen hobbling round London on bloody stumps, or rattling cups on street-corners. Daniel was startled to receive an invitation to the funeral. Not from John, of course, but from Charles, who had been John's fourth son and was now the only one left (the other two had died young of smallpox). After his stint as laboratory assistant during the Plague Year at Epsom, Charles had matriculated at Cambridge, where he'd been tutored by Daniel. He had been well on his way to being a competent Natural Philosopher. But now he was the scion of a great family, and never could be aught else, unless the family ceased to be great, or he ceased being a part of it. John Comstock got up in front of the church and said, 'The Hollander exceeds us in industry, and in all things else, but envy.' King Charles shut down the Exchequer one day, which is to say that he admitted that the country was out of money, and that not only could the Crown not repay its debts, but it couldn't even pay interest on them. Within a week, Daniel's uncle, Thomas Ham, Viscount Walbrook, was dead – of a broken heart or suicide, no one save Aunt Mayflower knew – but it scarcely made a difference. This led to the most theatrickal of all the scenes Daniel witnessed in London that year (with the possible exception of the re-enactment of the Siege of Maestricht): the opening of the Crypt. Thomas Ham's reliable basement had been sealed up by court officials immediately upon the death of its proprietor, and musketeers had been posted all round to prevent Ham's depositors (who had, in recent weeks, formed a small muttering knot that never went away, loitering outside; as others held up libels depicting the atrocities of King Looie's army in Holland, so these held up Goldsmiths's Notes addressed to Thomas Ham) from breaking in and claiming their various plates, candlesticks, and guineas. Legal maneuverings began, and continued round the clock, casting a queer shadow over Uncle Thomas's funeral, and stretching beyond it to two days, then three. The cellar's owner was already in the grave, his chief associates mysteriously unfindable, and rumored to be in Dunkirk trying to buy passage to Brazil with crumpled golden punch-bowls and gravy-boats. But those were rumors. The facts were in the famously safe and sturdy Ham Bros. Cellar on Threadneedle. This was finally unsealed by a squadron of Lords and Justices, escorted by musketeers, and duly witnessed by Raleigh, Sterling, and Daniel Waterhouse; Sir Richard Apthorp; and various stately and important Others. It was three days exactly since King Charles had washed his hands of the royal debts and Thomas Ham had met his personal Calvary at the hands of the Exchequer. That statistic was noted by Sterling Waterhouse – as always, noticer of details par excellence. As the crowd of Great and Good Men shuffled up the steps of Ham House, he muttered to Daniel: 'I wonder if we shall roll the stone aside and find an empty tomb?' Daniel was appalled by this dual sacrilege – then reflected that as he was now practically living in a theatre and mooning over an actress every night, he could scarcely criticize Sterling for making a jest. It turned out not to be a jest. The cellar was empty. Well – not empty. It was full, now, of speechless men, standing flatfooted on the Roman mosaic. RALEIGH: “I knew it would be bad. But – my God – there's not even a potatoe. ' STERLING: “It is a sort of anti-miracle.' LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR OF THE REALM: “Go up and tell the musketeers to go and get more musketeers.' They all stood there for quite a while. Attempts to make conversation flared sporadically all round the cellar and fizzled like flashes in damp pans. Except – strangely – among Waterhouses. Disaster had made them convivial. RALEIGH: “Our newest tenant informs me you've decided to turn architect, Daniel.' STERLING: “We thought you were going to be a savant.' DANIEL: “All the other savants are doing it. Just the other day, Hooke figured out how arches work.' STERLING: “I should have thought that was known by now.' RALEIGH: “Do you mean to say all existing arches have been built on guesswork ?' Sir Richard Apthorp: “Arches – and Financial Institutions.' DANIEL: “Christopher Wren is going to re-design all the arches in St. Paul's, now that Hooke has explained them.' STERLING: “Good! Maybe the new one won't become all bow-legged and down-at-heels, as the old one did.' RALEIGH: “I say, brother Daniel – don't you have some drawings to show us?' DANIEL: “Drawings?' RALEIGH: “In the w'drawing room, perhaps?' Which was a bad pun and a cryptickal sign, from Raleigh the patriarch (fifty-five years comically aged, to Daniel's eyes seeming like a young Raleigh dressed up in rich old man's clothes and stage-makeup), that they were all supposed to Withdraw from the cellar. So they did, and Sir Richard Apthorp came with them. They wound up on the upper floor of Ham House, in a bedchamber – the very same one that Daniel had gazed into from his perch atop Gresham's College. A rock had already come in through a window and was sitting anomalously in the middle of a rug, surrounded by polygons of glass. More were beginning to thud against the walls, so Daniel swung the windows open to preserve the glazing. Then they all retreated to the center of the room and perched up on the bed and watched the stones come in. STERLING: “Speaking of Guineas, or lack thereof – shame about the Guinea Company, what?' APTHORP: “Pfft! ‘Twas like one of your brother's theatrickal powder-squibs. Sold my shares of it long ago.' STERLING: “What of you, Raleigh?' RALEIGH: “They owe me money, is all.' APTHORP: “You'll get eight shillings on the pound.' RALEIGH: “An outrage – but better than what Thomas Ham's depositors will get.' DANIEL: “Poor Mayflower!' RALEIGH: “She and young William are moving in with me anon – and so you'll have to seek other lodgings, Daniel.' STERLING: “What fool is buying the Guinea Company's debts?' APTHORP: “James, Duke of York.' STERLING: “As I said – what dauntless hero is, et cetera . . .' DANIEL: “But that's nonsense! They are his own debts!' APTHORP: “They are the Guinea Company's debts. But he is winding up the Guinea Company and creating a new Royal Africa Company. He's to be the governor and chief shareholder.' RALEIGH: “What, sinking our Navy and making us slaves to Popery is not sufficient – he's got to enslave all the Neegers, too?' STERLING: “Brother, you sound more like Drake every day.' RALEIGH: “Being surrounded by an armed mob must be the cause of sounding that way.' APTHORP: “The Duke of York has resigned the Admiralty . . .' RALEIGH: “As there's nothing left to be Admiral of . . .' APTHORP: “And is going to marry that nice Catholic girl*and compose his African affairs.' STERLING: “Sir Richard, this must be one of those things that you know before anyone else does, or else there would be rioters in the streets.' RALEIGH: “There are, you pea-wit, and unless I'm having a Drakish vision, they have set fire to this very house.' STERLING: “I meant they'd be rioting ‘gainst the Duke, not our late bro-in-law.' DANIEL: “I personally witnessed a sort of riot ‘gainst the Duke the other day – but it was about his religious, not his military, political, or commercial shortcomings.' STERLING: “You left out ‘intellectual and moral.'' DANIEL: “I was trying to be concise – as we are getting a bit short of that spiritous essence, found in fresh air, for which fire competes with living animals.' RALEIGH: “The Duke of York! What bootlicking courtier was responsible for naming New York after him? 'Tis a perfectly acceptable city. ' DANIEL: “If I may change the subject . . . the reason I led us to this room was yonder ladder , which in addition to being an excellent Play Structure for William Ham, will also convey us to the roof – where it's neither so hot nor so smoky.' STERLING: “Daniel, never mind what people say about you – you always have your reasons. ' [Now a serio-comical musical interlude: the brothers Waterhouse break into a shouted, hoarse (because of smoke) rendition of a Puritan hymn about climbing Jacob's Ladder.] scene: The rooftops of Threadneedle Street. Shouts, shattering of glass, musket-shots heard from below. They gather round the mighty Ham-chimney, which is now venting smoke of burning walls and furniture below. SIR RICHARD APTHORP: “How inspiring, Daniel, to gaze down the widened and straightened prospect of Cheapside and know that St. Paul's will be rebuilt there anon – ‘pon mathematick principles – so that it's likely to stay up for a bit.' STERLING: “Sir Richard, you sound ominously like a preacher opening his sermon with a commonplace observation that is soon to become one leg of a tedious and strained analogy. ' APTHORP: “Or, if you please, one leg of an arch – the other to be planted, oh, about here. ' RALEIGH: “You want to build, what, some sort of triumphal arch, spanning that distance? May I remind you that first we want some sort of triumph !?' APTHORP: “It is only a similitude. What Christopher Wren means to do yonder in the way of a Church, I mean to do here with a Banca. And as Wren will use Hooke's principles to build that Church soundly, I'll use modern means to devise a Banca that – without in any way impugning your late brother-in-law's illustrious record – will not have armed mobs in front of it burning it down.' RALEIGH: “Our late brother-in-law was ruined, because the King borrowed all of his deposits – presumably at gunpoint – and then declined to pay 'em back – what mathematick principle will you use to prevent that ?' APTHORP: “Why, the same one that you and your co-religionists have used in order to maintain your faith: tell the King to leave us alone.' RALEIGH: “Kings do not love to be told that, or anything. ' APTHORP: “I saw the King yesterday, and I tell you that he loves being bankrupt even less. I was born in the very year that the King seized the gold and silver that Drake and the other merchants had deposited in the Tower of London for safekeeping. Do you recall it?' RALEIGH: “Yes, 'twas a black year, and made rebels of many who only wanted to be merchants.' APTHORP: “Your brother-in-law's business, and the practice of goldsmith's notes, arose as a result – no one trusted the Tower any more.' STERLING: “And after today no one will trust goldsmiths, or their silly notes.' APTHORP: “Just so. And just as the Empty Tomb on Easter led, in the fullness of time, to a Resurrection . . .' DANIEL: “I am stopping up mine ears now – if the conversation turns Christian, wave your hands about.' THE KNOWLEDGE THAT THE DUTCH had won the war percolated through London invisibly, like Plague. Suddenly everyone had it. Daniel woke up in Bedlam one morning knowing that William of Orange had opened the sluices and put a large part of his Republic under water to save Amsterdam. But he couldn't recall whence that knowledge had come. He and his brothers had worked their way up Threadneedle by assailing one rooftop after another. They'd parted company with Apthorp on the roof of his goldsmith's shop, which was still solvent – yet there was an armed mob in front of it , too, and in front of the next goldsmith's, and the next. Far from escaping a riot, they understood, somewhat too late, that they were working their way toward the center of a much larger one. The obvious solution was to turn round and go back the way they'd come – but now a platoon of Quakers was coming toward them over the rooftops gripping matchlocks, each Quaker trailing a long thread of smoke from the smoldering punk in his fingers. Looking north across Threadneedle they could see a roughly equivalent number of infantrymen headed over the rooftops of Broad Street, coming from the direction of Gresham's College, and it seemed obvious enough that Quakers and Army men would soon be swapping musket-balls over the heads of the mob of Quakers, Barkers, Ranters, Diggers, Jews, Huguenots, Presbyterians, and other sects down below. So it was down to the street and into the stone-throwing fray. But when they got down there, Daniel saw that these were not the young shin-kickers and head-butters of Drake's glory days. These were paunchy mercers who simply wanted to know where all of their money had got to. The answer was that it had gone to wherever it goes when markets crash. Daniel kept treading on wigs. Sometimes a hundred rioters would turn around and flee en bloc from sudden musket-fire and all of their wigs would fall off at once, as though this were a practiced military drill. Some of the wigs had dollops of brain in them, though, which ended up as pearly skeins on Daniel's shoes. They pushed their way up Broad Street, away from the ‘Change, which seemed to be the center of all disturbance. Those mock-Polish grenadiers were formed up in front of the building that had been the Guinea, and was soon to be the Royal Africa, Company. So the Waterhouses squirted past on the far side of the street, looking back to see whether any of those fatal spheres were trajecting after them. They tried to get in at Gresham's College. But many offices of the City of London had been moved into it after the fire, and so it was shut up and almost as well guarded as the Royal Africa Company. So they had kept moving north and eventually reached Bedlam, and found an evening's refuge there amid piles of dressed stone and splats of mortar. Sterling and Raleigh had departed the next morning, but Daniel had remained: encamped, becalmed, drained, and feeling no desire to go back into the city. From time to time he would hear a nearby church-bell tolling the years of someone who'd died in the rioting. Daniel's whereabouts became known, and messengers began to arrive, several times a day, bearing invitations to more funerals. He attended several of them, and was frequently asked to stand up and say a few words – not about the deceased (he scarcely knew most of them), but about more general issues of religious tolerance. In other words, he was asked to parrot what Wilkins would've said, and for Daniel that was easy – much easier than making up words of his own. Out of a balanced respect for his own father, he mentioned Drake, too. This felt like a slow and indirect form of suicide, but after his conversation with John Comstock he did not feel he had much of a life to throw away. He was strangely comforted by the sight of all those pews filled with men in white and black (though sometimes Roger Comstock would show up as a gem of color, accompanied by one or two courtiers who were sympathetic, or at least curious). More mourners would be visible through open doors and windows, filling the church-yard and street. It reminded him of the time during his undergraduate days when the Puritan had been murdered by Upnor, and Daniel had traveled five miles outside of Cambridge to the funeral, and found his father and brothers, miraculously, there. Exasperating to his mind but comforting to his soul. His words swayed their emotions much more than he wanted, or expected – as two inert substances, mixed in an Alchemist's mortar, can create a fulminating compound, so the invocation of Drake's and Wilkins's memories together. But this was not what he wanted and so he began to avoid the funerals after that, and stayed in the quiet stone-garden of Bedlam. Hooke was there, too, for Gresham's College had become too crowded with scheming fops. Bedlam was years away from being done. The masons hadn't even begun work on the wings. But the middle part was built, and on top of it was a round turret with windows on all sides, where Hooke liked to retreat and work, because it was lonely and the light was excellent. Daniel for his part stayed down below, and only went out into the city to meet with Leibniz. DOCTOR GOTTFRIED WILHELM LEIBNIZ picked up the coffee-pot and tipped it into his cup for the third time, and for the third time nothing came out of it. It had been empty for half an hour. He made a little sigh of regret, and then reluctantly stood up. 'I beg your pardon, but I begin a long journey tomorrow. First the Channel crossing – then, between Calais and Paris, we shall have to dodge French regiments, straggling home, abject, starving, and deranged.' Daniel insisted on paying the bill, and then followed the Doctor out the door. They began strolling in the direction of the inn where Leibniz had been staying. They were not far from the ‘Change. Paving-stones and charred firebrands still littered the unpaved streets. 'Not much divine harmony in evidence, here in London,' Daniel said. 'I can only hang my head in shame, as an Englishman.' 'If you and France had conquered the Dutch Republic, you would have much more to be ashamed of,' Leibniz returned. 'When, God willing, you get back to Paris, you can say that your mission was a success: there is no war.' 'It was a failure,' Leibniz said, 'we did not prevent the war.' 'When you came to London, Doctor, you said that your philosophick endeavours were nothing more than a cover for diplomacy. But I suspect that it was the other way round.' 'My philosophick endeavours were a failure, too,' Leibniz said. 'You have gained one adherent . . .' 'Yes. Oldenburg pesters me every day to complete the Arithmetickal Engine.' 'Make that two adherents, then, Doctor.' Leibniz actually stopped in his tracks and turned to examine Daniel's face, to see if he was jesting. 'I am honored, sir,' he said, 'but I would prefer to think of you not as an adherent but as a friend. ' 'Then the honor is all mine.' They linked arms and walked in silence for a while. 'Paris!' Leibniz said, as if it were the only thing that could get him through the next few days. 'When I get back to the Bibliothèque du Roi, I will turn all of my efforts to mathematics.' 'You don't want to complete the Arithmetickal Engine?' It was the first time Daniel had ever seen the Doctor show annoyance. 'I am a philosopher, not a watchmaker. The philosophickal problems associated with the Arithmetickal Engine have already been solved . . . I have found my way out of that labyrinth.' 'That reminds me of something you said on your first day in London, Doctor. You mentioned that the question of free will versus predestination is one of the two great labyrinths into which the mind is drawn. What, pray tell, is the other?' 'The other is the composition of the continuum, or: what is space? Euclid assures us that we can divide any distance in half, and then subdivide each of them into smaller halves, and so on, ad infinitum.Easy to say, but difficult to understand . . .' 'It is more difficult for metaphysicians than for mathematicians, I think,' Daniel said. 'As in so many other fields, modern mathematics has given us tools to work with things that are infinitely small, or infinitely large.' 'Perhaps I am too much of a metaphysician, then,' Leibniz said. 'I take it, sir, that you are referring to the techniques of infinite sequences and series?' 'Just so, Doctor. But as usual, you are overly modest. You have already demonstrated, before the Royal Society, that you know as much of those techniques as any man alive.' 'But to me, they do not resolve our confusion, so much as give us a way to think about how confused we are. For example – ' Leibniz gravitated toward a sputtering lamp dangling from the overhanging corner of a building. The City of London's new program to light the streets at night had suffered from the fact that the country was out of money. But in this riotous part of town, where (in the view of Sir Roger L'Estrange, anyway) any shadow might hide a conspiracy of Dissidents, it had been judged worthwhile to spend a bit of whale-oil on street-lamps. Leibniz fetched a stick from a pile of debris that had been a goldsmith's shop a week earlier, and stepped into the circle of brown light cast on the dirt by the lamp, and scratched out the first few terms of a series: 'If you sum this series, it will slowly converge on pi. So we have a way to approach the value of pi – to reach toward it, but never to grasp it . . . much as the human mind can approach divine things, and gain an imperfect knowledge of them, but never look God in the face.' 'It is not necessarily true that infinite series must be some sort of concession to the unknowable, Doctor . . . they can clarify, too! My friend Isaac Newton has done wizardly things with them. He has learned to approximate any curve as an infinite series.' Daniel took the stick from Leibniz, then swept out a curve in the dirt. 'Far from detracting from his knowledge, this has extended his grasp, by giving him a way to calculate the tangent to a curve at any point.' He carved a straight line above the curve, grazing it at one point. A black coach rattled up the street, its four horses driven onwards by the coachman's whip, but veering nervously around piles of debris. Daniel and Leibniz backed into a doorway to let it pass; its wheels exploded a puddle and turned Leibniz's glyphs and Daniel's curves into a system of strange canals, and eventually washed them away. 'Would that some of our work last longer than that, ' Daniel said ruefully. Leibniz laughed – for a moment – then walked silently for a hundred yards or so. 'I thought Newton only did Alchemy,' Leibniz said. 'From time to time, Oldenburg or Comstock or I cajole him into writing out some of his mathematical work.' 'Perhaps I need more cajoling,' Leibniz said. 'Huygens can cajole you, when you get back.' Leibniz shrugged violently, as if Huygens were sitting astride his neck, and needed to be got rid of. 'He has tutored me well, to this point. But if all he can do is give me problems that have already been solved by some Englishman, it must mean that he knows no more mathematics than I do.' 'And Oldenburg is cajoling you – but to do the wrong thing.' 'I shall endeavour to have an Arithmetickal Engine built in Paris, to satisfy Oldenburg,' Leibniz sighed. 'It is a worthy project, but for now it is a project for a mechanic.' They came into the light of another street-lamp. Daniel took advantage of it to look at his companion's face, and gauge his mood. Leibniz looked a good deal more resolute than he had beneath the previous street-lamp. 'It is childish of me to expect older men to tell me what to do,' the Doctor said. 'No one told me to think about free will versus predestination. I plunged into the middle of the labyrinth, and became thoroughly lost, and then had no choice but to think my way out of it.' 'The second labyrinth awaits you,' Daniel reminded him. 'Yes . . . it is time for me to plunge into it. Henceforth, that is my only purpose. The next time you see me, Daniel, I will be a mathematician second to none.' From any other Continental lawyer these words would have been laughably arrogant; but they had come from the mouth of the monster. I laid the reins upon the neck of my lusts. – John Bunyan, The Pilgrim's Progress DANIEL WAS AWAKENED one morning by a stifled boom, and supposed it was a piece being tested in the Artillery Yard outside of town. Just as he was about to fall back to sleep he heard it again: thump, like the period at the end of a book. Dawn-light had flooded the turret of Bedlam and was picking its way down through struts and lashings, plank-decks and scaffolds, dangling ropes and angling braces, to the ground floor where Daniel lay on a sack of straw. He could hear movements above: not blunderings of thieves or vermin, but the well-conceived, precisely executed maneuvers of birds, and of Robert Hooke. Daniel rose and, leaving his wig behind, so that the cool air bathed his stubbled scalp, climbed up toward the light, ascending the masons' ladders and ropes. Above his head, the gaps between planks were radiant, salmon-colored lines, tight and parallel as harpsichord-strings. He hoisted himself up through a hatch, rousting a couple of swallows, and found himself within the dome of the turret, sharing a hemispherical room with Robert Hooke. Dust made the air gently luminous. Hooke had spread out large drawings of wings and airscrews. Before the windows he had hung panes of glass, neatly scored with black Cartesian grids, plotted with foreshortened parabolae – the trajectories of actual cannonballs. Hooke liked to watch cannonballs fly from a stand-point next to the cannon, standing inside a contraption he had built, peering through these sheets of glass and tracing the balls' courses on them with a grease-pencil. 'Weigh out five grains of powder for me,' Hooke said. He was paying attention to part of a rarefying engine: one of many such piston-and-cylinder devices he and Boyle used to study the expansion of gases. Daniel went over to a tiny scale set up on a plank between two sawhorses. On the floor next to it was a keg branded with the coat of arms of the Silver Comstocks. Its bung was loose, and peppered with grains of coarse powder. Next to it rested a small cylindrical bag of linen, about the diameter of a fist, plump and round as a full sack of flour. This had once been sewn shut, but Hooke had snipped through the uneven stitches and teased it open. Looking in among the petals of frayed fabric, Daniel saw that it, too, was filled with black powder. 'Would you prefer I take it from the keg, or the little bag?' Daniel asked. 'As I value my eyes, and my Rarefying Engine, take it from the keg.' 'Why do you say so?' Daniel drew the loose bung out and found that the keg was nearly full. Taking up a copper spoon that Hooke had left near the scale (copper did not make sparks), he scooped up a small amount of powder from the bung-hole and began sprinkling it onto one of the scale's frail golden pans. But his gaze strayed towards the linen bag. In part this was because Hooke, who feared so little, seemed to think it was a hazard. Too, there was something about this bag that was familiar to him, though he could not place it in his memory. 'Rub a pinch between your fingers,' Hooke suggested. 'Come, there is no danger.' Daniel probed into the linen bag and got a smudge of the stuff on his fingertips. The answer was obvious. 'This is much finer than that in the keg.' And that was the clew that reminded him where he had seen such a bag before. The night that Roger Comstock had blown himself up in the laboratory, he had been grinding gunpowder very fine, and pouring it into a bag just like this one. 'Where did this come from? A theatre?' For once Hooke was flummoxed. 'What a very odd question for you to ask. Why do you phant'sy such a thing should come from a theatre, of all places?' 'The nature of the powder,' Daniel said. 'Ground so exceedingly fine.' He nodded at the bag, for his hands were busy. Having weighed out five grains of powder from the keg, he poured them from the scale-pan into a cupped scrap of paper and carried it over to Hooke. 'Such powder burns much faster than this coarse stuff.' He shook the paper for emphasis and it made a sandy rasp. He handed it to Hooke, who poured it into the cylinder of the Rarefying Engine. Some of these engines were wrought of glass, but this was a heavy brass tube about the size of a tobacco-canister: a very small siege-mortar, in effect. Its piston fit into it like a cannonball. 'I am aware of it,' Hooke said. 'That is why I do not wish to put five grains of it into the Rarefying Engine. Five grains of Comstock's powder burns slow and steady, and drives the piston up in a way that is useful to me. The same weight of that fine stuff from yonder bag would burn in an instant, and explode my apparatus, and me.' 'That is why I supposed the bag might have come from a theatre,' Daniel said. 'Such powder may be unsuitable for the Rarefying Engine, but on the stage it makes a pretty flash and bang.' 'That bag,' said Hooke, 'came from the magazine of one of His Majesty's Ships of War. The practice used to be, and still is on some ships, that powder is introduced into the bore of a cannon by scooping it up out of a keg and pouring it in. Similar to how a musketeer charges the barrel of his weapon. But in the heat of battle, our gunners are prone to mis-measure and to spill the powder on the deck. And to have open containers of powder near active cannon is to tempt disaster. A new practice is replacing the old. Before the battle, when it is possible to work calmly, the powder is carefully measured out and placed into bags, such as that one, which are sewn shut. The bags are stockpiled in the ship's magazine. During battle, as they are needed, they are ferried one at a time to the guns.' 'I see,' Daniel said, 'then the gunner need only slash the bag open and pour its contents into the bore.' Hardly for the first time, Hooke was a bit irked by Daniel's stupidity. 'Why waste time opening it with a knife, when fire will open it for you?' 'I beg your pardon?' 'Behold, the diameter of the bag is the same as the bore of the gun. Why open it then? No, the entire bag, sewn shut, is introduced into the barrel.' 'The gunners never even see what is inside of it!' Hooke nodded. 'The only powder that the gunners need concern themselves with is the priming-powder that is poured into the touch-hole and used to communicate fire to the bag.' 'Then those gunners are trusting the ones who sew up the bags – trusting them with their lives,' Daniel said. 'If the wrong sort of powder were used – ' and he faltered, and went over and dipped his fingers once more into the bag before him to feel the consistency of the powder inside. The difference between it and the Comstock powder was like that between flour and sand. 'Your discourse is strangely like that of John Comstock when he delivered that bag and that keg to me,' Hooke said. 'He brought them around in person ?' Hooke nodded. 'He said he no longer trusted anyone to do it for him.' Whereat Daniel must have looked shocked, for Hooke held up a hand as if to restrain him, and continued: 'I understood his state of mind too well. Some of us, Daniel, are prone to a sort of melancholy, wherein we are tormented by phant'sies that other men are secretly plotting to do us injury. It is a pernicious state for a man to fall into. I have harbored such notions from time to time about Oldenburg and others. Your friend Newton shows signs of the same affliction. Of all men in the world, I supposed John Comstock least susceptible to this disorder; but when he came here with this bag, he was very far gone with it, which grieved me more than anything else that has happened of late.' 'My lord believes,' Daniel guessed, 'that some enemy of his has been salting the magazines of Navy ships with bags filled with finely milled powder, such as this one. Such a bag, sewn shut, would look the same, to a gunner, as an ordinary one; but when loaded into the bore, and fired – ' 'It would burst the barrel and kill everyone nearby,' Hooke said. 'Which might be blamed on a faulty cannon, or on faulty powder; but as my lord manufactures both, the blame cannot but be laid on him in the end.' 'Where did this bag come from?' Daniel asked. 'My lord said it was sent to him by his son Richard, who found it in the magazine of his ship on the eve of their sailing for Sole Bay.' 'Where Richard was killed by a Dutch broadside,' Daniel said. 'So my lord desired that you would inspect this bag and render an opinion that it had been tampered with by some malicious conspirator.' 'Just so.' 'And have you done so?' 'No one has asked my opinion yet.' 'Not even Comstock?' 'Nay, not even Comstock.' 'Why would he bring you such evidence in person, and then not ask?' 'I can only guess,' Hooke said, 'that in the meantime he has come to understand that it does not really matter.' 'What an odd thing to think.' 'Not really,' Hooke said. 'Suppose I testified that this bag contained powder that was too fine. What would it boot him? Anglesey – for make no mistake, that's who's behind this – would reply that Comstock had made up this bag in his own cellar, as false evidence to exonerate himself and his faulty cannons. Comstock's son is the only man who could testify that it came from a ship's magazine, and he's dead. There might be other such bags in other magazines, but they are mostly on the bottom of the sea, thanks to Admiral de Ruyter. We have lost the war, and it must be blamed on someone. Someone other than the King and the Duke of York. Comstock has now come to understand that it is being blamed on him.' The daylight had become much more intense in the minutes Daniel had been up here. He saw that Hooke had rigged an articulated rod to the back of the piston, and connected the rod to a system of cranks. Now, by means of a tiny touch-hole in the base of the cylinder, he introduced fire to the chamber. Thump. The piston snapped up to the top of the bore much faster than Daniel could flinch away from it. This caused an instant of violent motion in the gear-train, which had the effect of winding a spring that spiraled around in a whirling hoop the size of a dinner-plate. A ratchet stopped this from unwinding. Hooke then re-arranged the gears so that the giant watch-spring was connected, by a string wound around a tapered drum, to the drive-shaft of a peculiar helical object, very light-weight, made of parchment stretched on a frame of steam-bent cane. Like a Screw of Archimedes. The spring unwound slowly, spinning the screw swiftly and steadily. Standing at one end of it, Daniel felt a palpable breeze, which continued for more than a minute – Hooke timed it with his latest watch. 'Properly wrought, and fed with gunpowder at regular intervals, it might generate enough wind to blow itself off the ground,' Hooke said. 'Supplying the gunpowder would be difficult,' Daniel said. 'I only use it because I have some,' Hooke said. 'Now that Anglesey has been elected President of the Royal Society, I look forward to experimenting with combustible vapors in its stead.' 'Even if I've moved to Massachusetts by then,' Daniel said, 'I'll come back to London to watch you fly through the air, Mr. Hooke.' A church-bell began ringing not far away. Daniel remarked that it was a bit early for funerals. But a few minutes later another one started up, and another. They did not simply bong a few times and then stop – they kept pealing in some kind of celebration. But the Anglican churches did not seem to be sharing in the joy. Only the queer churches of Dutchmen and Jews and Dissenters. LATER IN THE DAY , Roger Comstock appeared at the gates of Bedlam in a coach-and-four. The previous owner's coat of arms had been scraped off and replaced with that of the Golden Comstocks. 'Daniel, do me the honor of allowing me to escort you to Whitehall,' Roger said, 'the King wants you there for the signing.' 'Signing of what ?' Daniel could imagine several possibilities – Daniel's death warrant for sedition, Roger's for sabotage, or an instrument of surrender to the Dutch Republic, being three of the more plausible. 'Why, the Declaration! Haven't you heard? Freedom of conscience for Dissenters of all stripes – almost – just as Wilkins wanted it.' 'That is very good news, if true – but why should His Majesty want me there?' 'Why, next to Bolstrood you are the leading Dissenter!' 'That is not true.' 'It doesn't matter,' Roger said cheerfully. 'He thinks it's true – and after today, it will be.' 'Why does he think it's true?' Daniel asked, though he already suspected why. 'Because I have been telling everyone so,' Roger answered. 'I haven't clothes fit to wear to a whorehouse – to say nothing of Whitehall Palace.' 'There is very little practical difference,' Roger said absent-mindedly. 'You don't understand. My wig's home to a family of swallows,' Daniel complained. But Roger Comstock snapped his fingers, and a valet sprang out of the coach laden with diverse packages and bundles. Through the open door, Daniel glimpsed women's clothing, too – with women inside of it. Two different women. A thump from the turret, a muffled curse from Hooke. 'Don't worry, it's nothing foppish,' Roger said. 'For a leading Dissident, it is entirely proper.' 'Can the same be said of the ladies ?' Daniel asked, following Roger and the valet into Bedlam. 'These aren't ladies, ' Roger said, and other than that weak jest did not even try to answer the question. 'Do London a favor and take those damned clothes off. I shall have my manservant burn them.' 'The shirt is not so bad,' Daniel demurred. 'Oh, I agree that it is no longer fit for wearing. But it might be made into a powder-bag for the Navy.' 'No longer in demand,' Roger said, 'now that the war is over.' 'On the contrary, I say that a great many of them shall have to be made up now, as so many of the old ones are known to be defective.' 'Hmm, you are well-informed, for a political naif. Who has been filling your head with such ideas? Obviously a supporter of Comstock.' 'I suppose that supporters of Anglesey are saying that the powder-bags are all excellent, and it's Comstock's cannons that were made wrong.' 'It is universally known, among the Quality.' 'That may be. But it is known among you, and me, and a few other people, that bags were made up, containing powder that was ground fine.' Coincidentally or not, Daniel had reached the point of complete nakedness as he was saying these words. He had a pair of drawers on; but Roger tossed him fresh ones, and averted his gaze. 'Daniel! I cannot bear to see you in this state, nor can I listen to any more of your needling suspicious discourse. I will turn my back on you, and talk for a while. When I turn round again, I will behold a new man, as well informed as he is attired .' 'Very well, I suppose I've very little choice.' 'None whatsoever. Now, Daniel. You saw me grinding the powder fine, and putting it into the bag, and there is no point in denying it. No doubt you think the worst of me, as has been your wont since we first studied together at Trinity. Have you stopped to ask yourself, how a man in my position could possibly manage to introduce bags of powder into the magazines of a ship of the Royal Navy? Quite obviously it is impossible. Someone else must have done it. Someone with a great deal more power and reach than I can even dream of possessing.' 'The Duke of Gunfl – ' 'Silence. Silence! And in silence ponder the similitudes between cannons and mouths. The simpleton beholds a cannon and phant'sies it an infallible destroyer of foes. But the veteran artilleryman knows that sometimes, when a cannon speaks, it bursts. Especially when it has been loaded in haste. When this occurs, Daniel, the foe is untouched. He may sense a distant gaseous exhalation, not puissant enough to ruffle his periwig. The eager gunner, and all his comrades, are blown to bits. Ponder it, Daniel. And for once in your life, show a trace of discretion. It does not really matter what the gentleman's name was who was responsible for causing those cannons to burst. What matters is that I had no idea what I was doing.What do I , of all people, know about naval artillery? All I knew was this: I met certain gentlemen at the Royal Society. Presently they became aware that I worked in Newton's laboratory as an assistant. One of them approached me and asked if I might do him a favor. Nothing difficult. He wanted me to grind up some gunpowder very fine and deliver it to him in wee bags. This I did, as you know. I made up half a dozen of those bags over the course of a year. One of them blew up on the spot, thanks to you. Of the other five, I now know that one was smuggled into the ‘Siege of Maestricht,' where it caused a cannon to explode in full view of half of London. The other four went to the Royal Navy. One was detected by Richard Comstock, who sent it to his father. One exploded a cannon during a naval engagement against the Dutch. The other two have since found their way into David Jones's Magazine. As to my culpability: I did not understand until recently why the gentleman in question had made such an odd request of me. I did not know, when I was filling those bags, that they would be used to do murder.' Daniel, snaking his limbs through new clothes, believed every word of this. He had long ago lost count of Roger's moral lapses. Roger, he suspected, had broken as many of the ten commandments and committed as many of the seven deadly sins as it was in his power to do, and was actively seeking ways to break and commit those he had not yet ticked off the list. This had nothing to do with Roger's character. Someone was responsible for blowing up those poor gunners, as a ploy to dishonor the Earl of Epsom: as vile an act as Daniel could imagine. Thomas More Anglesey, Duke of Gunfleet, or one of his sons must have been at the head of the conspiracy, for as Roger had pointed out, Roger couldn't have done it all himself. The only question then was whether Roger had understood what was being done with those powder-bags. The Angleseys would never have told him, and so he'd have had to figure it out on his own. And Roger's career at Trinity gave no grounds to expect dazzling flashes of insight. Believing in Roger's innocence lifted from Daniel's shoulders an immense weight that he had not been sensible of until it was gone. This felt so good that it triggered a few moments of Puritanical self-examination. Anything that felt so good might be a trick of the devil. Was he only feigning trust in Roger, because it felt good? 'How can you go on associating with those people when you know the atrocious thing they have done?' 'I was going to ask you.' 'I beg your pardon?' 'You have been associating with them since the Plague Year, Daniel, at every meeting of the Royal Society.' 'But I did not know they were doing murder!' 'On the contrary, Daniel, you have known it ever since that night at Trinity twelve years ago when you watched Louis Anglesey murder one of your brethren.' Had he been a rather different sort of chap, Roger might have mentioned this in a cruelly triumphant way. Had he been Drake, he'd have said it sadly, or angrily. But being Roger Comstock, he proffered it as a witticism. He did it so well that Daniel let out a wee snort of amusement before coming to his senses and stifling himself. The terms of the transaction finally were clear. Why did Daniel refuse to hate Roger? Not out of blindness to Roger's faults, for he saw Roger's moral cowardice as clearly as Hooke peering through a lens at a newt. Not out of Christian forgiveness, either. He refused to hate Roger because Roger saw moral cowardice in Daniel, had done so for years, and yet did not hate Daniel. Fair's fair. They were brothers. As much as he had to ponder in the way of moral dilemmas vis-à-vis Roger, 'twas as nothing compared to half an hour later, when Daniel emerged, booted, bewigged, cravated, and jacketed, and equipped with a second-hand watch that Roger somehow begged off of Hooke, and climbed into the coach. For one of the women in there was Tess Charter. Thump. When she and the other woman were finished laughing at the look on Daniel's face, she leaned forward and got her fingers all entangled with his. She was shockingly and alarmingly alive:somewhat more alive, in fact, than he was. She looked him in the eyes and spoke in her French accent: 'Twooly, Daniel, eet eez ze hrole of a lifetime – portraying ze mistress of a gentlemen who eez too pure – too spiritual – to sink zee thoughts of zee flesh.' Then a middling London accent. 'But really I prefer the challenging parts. The ability to do them's what separates me from Nell Gwyn.' 'I wonder what separates the King from Nell Gwyn?' said the other woman. 'Ten inches of sheepgut with a knot in one end – if the King knows what's good for him!' Tess returned. Thump. This led to more in a similar vein. Daniel turned to Roger, who was sitting next to him, and said, 'Sir! What on earth makes you believe I wish to appear to have a mistress?' 'Who said anything about appearing to have one?' Roger answered, and when Daniel didn't laugh, gathered himself up and said, 'Poh! You could no more show up at Whitehall without a mistress, than at a duel without a sword! Come, Daniel! No one will take you seriously! They'll think you're hiding something!' 'And that he is – though none too effectively,' Tess said, eyeing a new convexity in Daniel's breeches. 'I loved your work in The Dutch Strumpet, ' Daniel tried, weakly. Thus, down London Wall and westwards, ho! – Daniel's every attempt to say anything serious pre-empted by a courtly witticism – more often than not, so bawdy he didn't even understand it, any more than Tess would understand the Proceedings of the Royal Society. Every jest followed by exaltations of female laughter and then a radical, and completely irrational, change in subject. Just when Daniel thought he had imposed a bit of order on the conversation, the coach rattled into the middle of St. Bartholomew's Fair. Suddenly, outside the windows, bears were dancing jigs and hermaphrodites were tottering about on stilts. Devout men and well-bred ladies would avert their eyes from such sights, but Tess and the other woman (another Comedian, who gave every indication of being Roger's authentic, not imaginary, mistress) had no intentions of averting their gazes from anything. They were still chattering about what they'd seen ten minutes later as the coach moved down Holborn. Daniel decided to take his cue from Roger, who rather than trying to talk to the ladies merely sat and watched them, face smeared with a village idiot's grin. They stopped by the corner of Waterhouse Square for ritual adoration of Roger's new lot, and to make sniping comments about Raleigh's house: that soon-to-be-o'ershadowed pile that Raleigh's architect had (it was speculated) blown out of his arse-hole during an attaque of the bloody phlux. The ladies made comments in a similar vein about the attire of the widow Mayflower Ham, who was descending from same, on her way to Whitehall, too. Then down past any number of fields, churches, squares, et cetera, named after St. Giles, and a completely gratuitous detour along Piccadilly to Comstock House, where Roger had the coach stop so that he could spend several minutes savoring the spectacle of the Silver Comstocks moving out of the building that had served as their London seat since the Wars of the Roses. Colossal paintings, depicting scenes of hunting and of naval engagements, had been pulled out and leaned against the wrought-iron fence. Below them was a clutter of smaller canvases, mostly portraits, stripped of their gilded frames, which were going to auction. Making it appear that there was a whole crowd of Silver Comstocks, mostly in out-moded doublets or neck-ruffs, milling about down there and peering out grimly through the fence. 'All behind bars where they should've been a hundred years ago!' Roger said, and then laughed at his own jest, loud enough to draw a look from John Comstock himself, who was standing in his forecourt watching some porters maneuver out the door a mainsail-sized painting of some Continental Siege. Daniel's eye fixed on this. Partly it was because looking at the Earl of Epsom made him melancholy. But also it was because he had been spending so much time with Leibniz, who often spoke of paintings such as this one when talking about the mind of God. On one piece of canvas, seemingly from one fixed point of view, the artist had depicted skirmishes, sallies, cavalry charges, and the deaths of several of the principals, which had occurred in different places at different times. And this was not the only liberty he had taken with the notion of time and space, for certain events – the digging of a mine beneath a bastion, the detonation of the mine, and the ensuing battle – were shown all together at once. The images stood next to each other like pickled larvae in the Royal Society's collection, sharing the same time for all time, and yet if you let your eye travel over them in the correct order you could make the story unfold within your mind, each event in its proper moment. This great painting did not, of course, stand alone, but was surrounded by all of the other paintings that had been carried out of the house before; its perceptions were ranged alongside others, this little Siege-world nested within a larger array of other things that the House of Comstock during its long history had perceived, and thought worthy to be set down on canvas. Now they were all being aired out and reshuffled, on a gloomy occasion. But to have this moment – the fall of the Silver Comstocks – embedded in so many old ones made it seem less terrible that it might have seemed if it had happened naked, as it were, and all alone in time and space. THE EARL OF EPSOM TURNED his head and gazed across Piccadilly at his Golden cousin, but showed no particular emotion. Daniel had shrunk far down into the coach, where he hoped he'd be enshrouded in darkness. To him, John Comstock looked almost relieved. How bad could it be to live in Epsom and go hunting and fishing every day? That's what Daniel told himself – but later the sadness and haggardness in the Earl's face would appear in his mind's eye at the oddest times. 'Do not become stupid now, just because you are seeing his face,' Roger said to him. 'That man was a Cavalier. He led cavalry charges against the Parliamentarian foot-soldiers. Do you know what that means? Do you see that great bloody awful painting there of Comstock's great-uncle and his friends galloping after that fox? Replace the fox with a starving yeoman, unarmed, alone, and you have a fair picture of how that man spent the Civil War.' 'I know all that,' Daniel said. 'And yet, and yet, somehow I still prefer him and his family to the Duke of Gunfleet and his family.' 'John Comstock had to be cleared out of the way, and we had to lose a war, before anything could happen,' Roger said. 'As to Anglesey and his spawn, I love them even less than you do. Do not fret about them. Enjoy your triumph and your mistress. Leave Anglesey to me.' Then to Whitehall where they, and various Bolstroods and Waterhouses and many others, watched the King sign the Declaration. As penned by Wilkins, this document had given freedom of conscience to everyone. The version that the King signed today was not quite so generous: it outlawed certain extreme heretics, such as Arians who didn't believe in the Trinity. Nevertheless, it was a good day's work. Certainly enough to justify raising several pints, in several Drury Lane taverns, to the memory of John Wilkins. Daniel's pretend mistress accompanied him on every stage of this epochal pub-crawling campaign, which led eventually to Roger Comstock's playhouse, and, in particular, to a back-room of that playhouse, where there happened to be a bed. 'Who has been making sausages in here?' Daniel inquired. Which sent Tess into a fit of the giggles. She had just about got his new breeches off. 'I should say you have made a pretty one!' she finally managed to get out. 'I should say you are responsible for making it,' Daniel demurred, and then (now that it was in plain view) added: 'and it is anything but pretty.' 'Wrong on both counts!' said Tess briskly. She stood up and grabbed it. Daniel gasped. She gave it a tug; Daniel yelped, and drew closer. 'Ah, so it is attached to you. You shall have to accept responsibility for the making of it, then; can't blame the lasses for everything. And as for pretty – ' she relaxed her grip, and let it rest on the palm of her hand, and gave it a good look. 'You've never seen a nasty one, have you?' 'I was raised to believe they were all quite nasty.' 'That may be true – it is all metaphysickal, isn't it? Quite. But please know some are nastier than others. And that is why we have sausage-casings in a bedchamber.' She proceeded to do something quite astonishing with ten inches of knotted sheepgut. Not that he needed ten inches; but she was generous with it, perhaps to show him a kind of respect. 'Does this mean it is not actually coitus?' Daniel asked hopefully. 'Since I am not really touching you?' Actually he was touching her in a lot of places, and vice versa. But where it counted he was touching nothing but sheepgut. 'It is very common for men of your religion to say so,' Tess said. 'Almost as common as this irksome habit of talking while you are doing it.' 'And what do you say?' 'I say that we are not touching, and not having sex, if it makes you feel better,' Tess said. 'Though, when all is finished, you shall have to explain to your Maker why you are at this moment buggering a dead sheep.' 'Please do not make me laugh!' Daniel said. 'It hurts somehow.' 'What is funny? I simply speak the truth. What you are feeling is not hurting.' He understood then that she was right. Hurting wasn't the word for it. When Daniel woke up in that bed, sometime in the middle of the following afternoon, Tess was gone. She'd left him a note (who'd have thought she was literate? But she had to read the scripts). Daniel, We shall make more sausages later. I am off to act. Yes, it may have slipped your mind that I am an actress. Yesterday I worked, playing the role of mistress. It is a difficult role, because dull. But now it has become fact, not farce, and so I shall not have to act any more; much easier. As I am no longer professionally engaged, pretending to be your mistress, I shall no longer be receiving my stipend from your friend Roger. As I am now your mistress in fact, some small gift would be appropriate. Forgive my forwardness. Gentlemen know such things, Puritans must be instructed. Tess P.S. You want instruction in acting. I shall endeavour to help. Daniel staggered about the room for some minutes collecting his clothes, and tried to put them on in the right order. It did not escape his notice that he was getting dressed, like an actor, in the backstage of a theatre. When he was done he found his way out among sets and properties and stumbled out onto the stage. The house was empty, save for a few actors dozing on benches. Tess was right. He had found his place now: he was just another actor, albeit he would never appear on a stage, and would have to make up his own lines ad libitum. His role, as he could see plainly enough, was to be a leading Dissident who also happened to be a noted savant, a Fellow of the Royal Society. Until lately he would not have thought this a difficult role to play, since it was so close to the truth. But whatever illusions Daniel might once have harbored about being a man of God had died with Drake, and been cremated by Tess. He very much phant'sied being a Natural Philosopher, but that simply was not going to work if he had to compete against Isaac, Leibniz, and Hooke. And so the role that Roger Comstock had written for him was beginning to appear very challenging indeed. Perhaps, like Tess, he would come to prefer it that way. That much had been evident to him on that morning in 1673. But the ramifications had been as far beyond his wits as Calculus would've been to Mayflower Ham. He could not have anticipated that his new-launched career as actor on the stage of London would stretch over the next twenty-five years. And even if he had foreseen that, he could never have phant'sied that, after forty, he would be called back for an encore. AboardMinerva, Cape Cod Bay, Massachusetts NOVEMBER 1713 BLACKBEARD IS AFTER HIM! Daniel spent the day terrified even before he knew this – now's the time to be struck dead with fear. But he is calm instead. Partly it's that the surgeon's not sewing him together any more, and anything's an improvement on that. Partly it's that he lost some blood, and drank some rum, during the operation. But those are mechanistic explanations. Despite all that Daniel said to Wait Still concerning Free Will, et cetera, on the eve of his departure from Boston, he is not willing to believe, yet, that he is controlled by his balance of humours. No, Daniel is in a better mood (once he's had an hour or two to rest up, anyway) because things are beginning to make sense now. Albeit scantly. Pain scares him, death doesn't especially (he never expected to live so long!), but chaos, and the feeling that the world is not behaving according to rational laws, put him into the same state of animal terror as a dog who's being dissected alive but cannot understand why. To him the rolling eyes of those bound and muzzled dogs have ever been the touchstone of fear. 'Out for a stroll so soon, Doctor?' Dappa's evidently recognized him by the tread of his shoes and walking-stick on the quarterdeck – he hasn't taken the spyglass away from his eye in half an hour. 'What about that schooner is so fascinating, Mr. Dappa? Other than that it's full of murderers.' 'The Captain and I are having a dispute. I say it is a floaty and leewardly Flemish pirate-bottom. Van Hoek sees idioms in its rigging that argue to the contrary.' ' Bottommeaning her hull – floatymeaning she bobs like a cork, with little below the water-line – which is desirable, I gad, for Flemings and pirates alike, as both must slip into shallow coves and harbors – ' 'Perfect marks so far, Doctor.' ' Leewardly,then, I suppose, means that because of that faintness in the keel, the wind tends to push her sideways through the water whenever she is sailing close-hauled – as she is now.' 'And as are we, Doctor.' ' Minervahas the same defect, I suppose – ' This slander finally induces Dappa to take the spyglass away from his eye. 'Why should you assume any such thing?' 'All these Amsterdam-ships are flat-bottomed of necessity, are they not? For entering the Ijsselmeer . . .' ' Minervawas built on the Malabar coast.' 'Mr. Dappa!' 'I would not dishonor you with jests, Doctor. It is true. I was there.' 'But how – ' ' 'Tis an awkward time to be telling you the entire Narration,' Dappa observes. 'Suffice it to say that she is not leewardly. Her apparent course is as close as it can be to her true course.' 'And you'd like to know, whether the same is true of yonder schooner,' Daniel says. 'It is not unlike the problem an astronomer faces, when – imprisoned as he is on a whirling and hurtling planet – he tries to plot the true trajectory of a comet through the heavens.' 'Now it's my turn to wonder whether you are jesting.' 'The water is like the Cœlestial Æther, a fluid medium through which all things move. Cape Cod, over yonder, is like the distant, fixed stars – by sighting that church-steeple in Provincetown, the High Land of Cape Cod to the south of it, the protruding mast of yonder wrack, and then by doing a bit of trigonometry, we may plot our position, and by joining one point to the next, draw our trajectory. The schooner, then, is like a comet – also moving through the æther – but by measuring the angles she makes with us and with the church-steeple, et cetera, we may find her true course; compare it with her apparent heading; and easily judge whether she is, or is not, leewardly.' 'How long would it take?' 'If you could make sightings, and leave me in peace to make calculations, I could have an answer in perhaps half an hour.' 'Then let us begin without delay,' Dappa says. Plotting it out on the back of an old chart in the common room, Daniel begins to understand the urgency. To escape the confines of Cape Cod Bay, they must clear Race Point at the Cape's northernmost tip. Race Point is northeast of them. The wind, for the last few hours, has been steady from northwest by north. Minerva can sail six points*from the wind, so she can just manage a northeasterly course. So leaving aside pirate-ships and other complications, she's in a good position to clear Race Point within the hour. But as a matter of fact there are two pirate-ships paralleling her course, much as the schooner-that-sucked and the ketch were doing earlier. To windward (i.e., roughly northwest of Minerva ) is a big sloop – Teach's flagship – which has complete freedom of movement under these circumstances. She's fast, maneuverable, well-armed, capable of sailing four points from the wind, and well to the north of the dangerous shallows, hence in no danger of running aground off of Race Point. The schooner, on the other hand, is to leeward, between Minerva and the Cape. She can also sail four points from the wind – meaning that she should be able to angle across Minerva 's course and grapple with her before Race Point. And if she does, there's no doubt that Teach's sloop will come in along the larboard side at the same moment, so that Minerva will be boarded from both sides at once. If that is all true, then Minerva 's best course is to turn her stern into the wind, fall upon the schooner, attack, and then come about (preferably before running aground on the Cape) and contend with the sloop. But if Dappa is right, and the schooner suffers from the defect of leewardliness, then all's not as it seems. The wind will push her sideways, away from Minerva and toward the Race Point shallows – she won't be able to intercept Minerva soon enough, and, to avoid running aground, she'll have to tack back to the west, taking her out of the action. If that is true, Minerva 's best course is to maintain her present close-hauled state and wait for Teach's sloop to make a move. It's all in the arithmetic – the same sort of arithmetic that Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, is probably grinding through at this very moment at the Observatory in Greenwich, toiling through the night in hopes of proving that Sir Isaac's latest calculation of the orbit of the moon is wrong. Except here Minerva 's the Earth, that schooner is Luna, and fixed Boston is, of course, the Hub of the Universe. Daniel passes an extraordinarily pleasant half-hour turning Dappa's steady observations into sines and cosines, conic sections and fluxions. Pleasant because it is imbued with the orderliness that taketh away his fear. Not to mention a fascination that makes him forget the throbbing and pulling stitches in his flesh. 'Dappa is correct. The schooner drifts to leeward, and will soon fall by the wayside or run aground,' he announces to van Hoek, up on the poop deck. Van Hoek puffs once, twice, thrice on his pipe, then nods and goes into Dutch mutterings. Mates and messenger-boys disseminate his will into all compartments of the ship. Minerva forgets about the schooner and bends all efforts to the expected fight against Teach's wicked sloop-of-war. In another half-hour, the leewardly schooner provides some coarse entertainment by actually running aground at the very knuckle of Cape Cod's curled fist. This is ignominious, but hardly unheard-of; these English pirates have only been in Massachusetts for a couple of weeks and can't expect to have all the sand-banks committed to memory. This skipper would rather run aground in soft sand, and refloat later, than flinch from battle and face Blackbeard Teach's wrath. Van Hoek immediately has them come about to west by south, as if they were going to sail back to Boston. His intent is to cut behind Teach's stern and fire a broadside up the sloop's arse and along her length. But Teach has too much intelligence for that, and so breaks the other way, turning to the east to get clear of Minerva 's broadside, then wearing round to the south, pausing near the grounded schooner to pick up a few dozen men who might come in useful as boarders. After a short time he comes up astern of Minerva . A tacking duel plays out there off of Race Point for an hour or so, Teach trying to find a way to get within musket-range of Minerva without being blown apart, van Hoek trying to fire just a single well-considered broadside. There are some paltry exchanges of fire. Teach puts a small hole in Minerva 's hull that is soon patched, and a cloud of hurtling junk from one of Minerva 's carronnades manages to carry away one of the sloop's sails, which is soon replaced. But with time, even van Hoek's hatred of pirates is worn down by the tedium, and by the need to get away from land while the sun is shining. Dappa reminds him that the Atlantic Ocean is just a mile or two that-a-way, and that nothing stands any more between them and it. He persuades van Hoek that there's no better way to humiliate a pirate than to leave him empty-handed, his decks crowded with boarders who have nothing to throw their grappling-hooks at. To out-sail a pirate, he insists, is a sweeter revenge than to out-fight him. So van Hoek orders Minerva to come about and point herself toward England. The men who've been manning the guns are told to make like Cincinnatus, walking away from their implements of war at the very moment of their victory so that they may apply themselves to peaceful toils: in this case, spreading every last sail that the ship can carry. Tired, smoke-smeared men lumber up into the light and, after a short pause to swallow ladles of water, go to work swinging wide the studdingsail booms. This nearly doubles the width of the ship's mightiest yards. The studdingsails tumble from them and snap taut in the wind. Like an albatross that has endured a long pursuit through a cluttered wilderness, tediously dodging and veering from hazard to hazard, and that finally rises above the clutter, and sees the vast ocean stretching before it, Minerva spreads her wings wide, and flies. The hull has shrunk to a mote, dragged along below a giant creaking nebula of firm canvas. Teach can be seen running up and down the length of his sloop with smoke literally coming out of his head, waving his cutlass and exhorting his crew, but everyone knows that Queen Anne's Revenge is a bit crowded, not to mention under-victualled, for a North Atlantic cruise in November. Minervaaccelerates into blue water with power that Daniel can feel in his legs, crashing through the odd rogue swell just as she rammed a pirate-boat earlier today, and, as the sun sets on America, she begins the passage to the Old World sailing large before a quartering wind.