=== CHUNK 35: Words 68001-70000 ===
pirate-rope, then draws it inside the cabin and severs it with a smart swing of his cutlass. 'Lift your head toward the horizon, Cap'n, and behold the flotilla of coasting craft – sloops and topsail schooners, and a ketch – that is forming up there in Plymouth Bay. Half a dozen or more vessels. Strange information glancing from one to the next embodied in pennants, guns, and flashes of sunlight.' 'It is because of them that the riffraff in the small craft cannot make a living?' 'Just so, Cap'n. Now, if we'd put up a brave front, as you suggested, they'd've known their cause was hopeless, and might've been tempted to make common cause with Teach.' 'Teach?' 'Cap'n Edward Teach, the Admiral of yonder pirate-fleet. But as it is, these small-timers have spent themselves in a futile try at seizing Minerva before Teach could make sail and form up. Now we can address the Teach matter separately.' 'There was a Teach in the Royal Navy – ' 'He is the same fellow. He and his men fought on the Queen's side in the War, helping themselves to Spanish shipping. Now that the treaty is signed and we are friendly with Spain, these fellows are at loose ends, and have crossed the Atlantic to seek a home port for American piracy.' 'So I ween it's not our cargo that Teach wants, so much as – ' 'If we threw every last bale overboard, still he would come after us. He wants Minerva for his flagship. And a mighty raider she would be.' There's been no gunfire recently, so Daniel crosses over to the window and watches sail after sail unfurling, Teach's fleet developing into a steady cloud on the bay. 'They look like fast ships,' he says. 'We'll be seeing Teach soon.' 'He's easily recognized – according to them we questioned, he's a master of piratical performances. Wears smoking punks twined about his head, like burning dreadlocks, and, at night, burning tapers in his thick black beard. He's got half the people in Plymouth convinced he's the Devil incarnate.' 'What think you, Dappa?' 'I think there never was a Devil so fierce as Cap'n van Hoek, when pirates are after his Lady.' Charing Cross Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) september 1686 I find that men (as high as trees) will write Dialogue-wise; yet no man doth them slight For writing so; indeed if they abuse Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use To that intent; but yet let truth be free To make her sallies upon thee, and me, Which way it pleases God. – John Bunyan, The Pilgrim's Progress Dramatis Personae DANIEL WATERHOUSE , a Puritan. SIR RICHARD APTHORP, a former Goldsmith, proprietor of Apthorp's Bank. A DUTCHMAN. A JEW. ROGER COMSTOCK, Marquis of Ravenscar, a courtier. JACK KETCH, chief Executioner of England. A HERALD. A BAILIFF. EDMUND PALLING, an old man. TRADERS. APTHORP'S MINIONS. APTHORP'S HANGERS-ON AND FAVOR-SEEKERS. JACK KETCH'S ASSISTANTS. SOLDIERS. MUSICIANS. Scene: A court hemmed in by colonnades. Discover DANIEL WATERHOUSE, seated on a Chair amid scuffling and shouting TRADERS. Enter SIR RICHARD APTHORP, with Minions, Hangers-on, and Favor-seekers. APTHORP: It couldn't be – Dr. Daniel Waterhouse! WATERHOUSE: Well met, Sir Richard! APTHORP: Sitting in a chair, no less! WATERHOUSE: The day is long, Sir Richard, my legs are tired. APTHORP: It helps if you keep moving – which is the whole point of the ‘Change, by the by. This is the Temple of Mercury – not of Saturn! WATERHOUSE: Did you think I was being Saturnine? Saturn is Cronos, the God of Time. For your truly Saturnine character you had better look to Mr. Hooke, world's foremost clockmaker . . . Enter Dutchman. DUTCHMAN: Sir! Our Mr. Huygens taught your Mr. Hooke everything he knows! Exits. WATERHOUSE: Different countries revere the same gods under different names. The Greeks had Cronos, the Romans Saturn. The Dutch have Huygens and we have Hooke. APTHORP: If you are not Saturn, what are you, then, to bide in a chair, so gloomy and pensive, in the middle of the ‘Change? WATERHOUSE: I am he who was born to be his family's designated participant in the Apocalypse; who was named after the strangest book in the Bible; who rode Pestilence out of London and Fire into it. I escorted Drake Waterhouse and King Charles from this world, and I put Cromwell's head back into its grave with these two hands. APTHORP: My word! Sir! WATERHOUSE: Of late I have been observed lurking round Whitehall, dressed in black, affrighting the courtiers. APTHORP: What brings Lord Pluto to the Temple of Mercury? Enter Jew. JEW: By're leave, by're leave, Señor – pray – where stands the tablero? Wanders off. APTHORP: He sees that you have a Chair, and hopes you know where is the Table. WATERHOUSE: That would be mesa. Perhaps he means banca, desk . . . APTHORP: Every other man in this ‘Change, who is seated upon a chair, is in front of such a banca. He wants to know where yours has got to! WATERHOUSE: I meant that perhaps he is looking for the bank. APTHORP: You mean, me? WATERHOUSE: That is the new title you have given your goldsmith's shop now, is it not? A bank? APTHORP: Why, yes; but why doesn't he just ask for me then? WATERHOUSE: Señor! A moment, I beg you! Jew returns with a paper. JEW: Like this, like this! APTHORP: What is he holding up there, I do not have my spectacles. WATERHOUSE: He has drawn what a Natural Philosopher would identify as a Cartesian coordinate plane, and what you would style a ledger, and scrawled words in one column, and numerals in the next. APTHORP: Tablero – he means the board where the prices of something are billed. Commodities, most likely. JEW: Commodities, yes! WATERHOUSE: ‘Sblood, it's right over there in the corner, is the man blind? APTHORP: Rabbi, do not take offense at my friend's irritable tone, for he is the Lord of the Underworld, and known for his moods. Here in Mercury's temple all is movement, flux – which is why we name it the ‘Change. Knowledge and intelligence flow like the running waters spoken of in the Psalms. But you have made the mistake of asking Pluto, the God of Secrets. Why is Pluto here? 'Tis something of a mystery – I myself was startled to see him just now, and supposed I was looking at a ghost. WATERHOUSE: The tablero is over yonder. JEW: That is all!? APTHORP: You have come from Amsterdam? JEW: Yes. APTHORP: How many commodities are billed on the tablero in Amsterdam now? JEW: This number . . . Writes. APTHORP: Daniel, what has he written there? WATERHOUSE: Five hundred and fifty. APTHORP: God save England, the Dutchmen have a tablero with near six hundred commodities, and we've a plank with a few dozen. WATERHOUSE: No wonder he did not recognize it. Exit Jew in the direction of said Plank, rolling his eyes and scoffing. Apthorp (to Minion): Follow that Kohan and learn what he is on about – he knows something. Exit Minion. WATERHOUSE: Now who is the God of Secrets? APTHORP: You are, for you still have not told me why you are here. WATERHOUSE: As Lord of the Underworld, I customarily sit enthroned in the Well of Souls, where departed spirits whirl about me like so many dry leaves. Arising this morning at my lodgings in Gresham's College and strolling down Bishopsgate, I chanced to look in ‘tween the columns of the ‘Change here. It was deserted. But a wind-vortex was picking up all the little scraps of paper dropped by traders yesterday and making 'em orbit round past all of the bancas like so many dry leaves . . . I became confused, thinking I had reached Hell, and took my accustomed seat. APTHORP: Your discourse is annoying. Enter Marquis of Ravenscar, magnificently attired. RAVENSCAR: “The hypothesis of vortices is pressed with many difficulties!' WATERHOUSE: God save the King, m'lord. APTHORP: God save the King – and damn all riddlers – m'lord. WATERHOUSE: ‘Twere redundant to damn Pluto. RAVENSCAR: He's damning me, Daniel, for prating about vortices. APTHORP: The mystery is resolved. For now I perceive that the two of you have arranged to meet here. And since you are speaking of vortices, m'lord, I ween it has to do with Natural Philosophy. RAVENSCAR: I beg leave to disagree, Sir Richard. For 'twas this fellow in the chair who chose the place of our meeting. Normally we meet in the Golden Grasshopper. APTHORP: So the mystery endures. Why the ‘Change today, then, Daniel? WATERHOUSE: You will see soon enough. RAVENSCAR: Perhaps it is because we are going to exchange some documents. Voilà! APTHORP: What is that you have whipped out of your pocket m'lord, I do not have my spectacles. RAVENSCAR: The latest from Hanover. Dr. Leibniz has favored you, Daniel, with a personalized and autographed copy of the latest Acta Eruditorum. Lots of mathematickal incantations are in here, chopped up with great stretched-out S marks – extraordinary! WATERHOUSE: Then the Doctor has finally dropped the other shoe, for that could only be the Integral Calculus. RAVENSCAR: Too, some letters addressed to you personally, Daniel, which means they've only been read by a few dozen people so far. WATERHOUSE: By your leave. APTHORP: Good heavens, m'lord, if Mr. Waterhouse had snatched 'em any quicker they'd've caught fire. One who dwells in the Underworld ought to be more cautious when handling Inflammable Objects. WATERHOUSE: Here, m'lord, fresh from Cambridge, as promised, I give you Books I and II of Principia Mathematica by Isaac Newton – have a care, some would consider it a valuable document. APTHORP: My word, is that the cornerstone of a building, or a manuscript? RAVENSCAR: Err! To judge by weight, it is the former. APTHORP: Whatever it is, it is too long, too long! WATERHOUSE: It explains the System of the World. APTHORP: Some sharp editor needs to step in and take that wretch in hand! RAVENSCAR: Will you just look at all of these damned illustrations . . . do you realize what this will cost, for all of the woodcuts? WATERHOUSE: Think of each one of them as saving a thousand pages of tedious explanations full of great stretched-out S marks. RAVENSCAR: None the less, the cost of printing this is going to bankrupt the Royal Society! APTHORP: So that is why Mr. Waterhouse is seated at a chair, with no banca:it is a symbolic posture, meant to express the financial condition of the Royal Society. I very much fear that I am to be asked for money at this point. Say, can either one of you hear a word I am saying? Silence. APTHORP: Go ahead and read. I don't mind being ignored. Are those documents terribly fascinating, then? Silence. APTHORP: Ah, like a salmon weaving a devious course up-torrent, slipping round boulders and leaping o'er logs, my assistant is making his way back to me. Enter Minion. MINION: You were right concerning the Jew, Sir Richard. He wants to purchase certain commodities in large amounts. APTHORP: At this moment on a Board in Amsterdam, those commodities must be fetching a higher price than is scribbled on our humble English Plank. The Jew wants to buy low here, and sell high there. Pray tell, what sorts of commodities are in such high demand in Amsterdam? MINION: He takes a particular interest in certain coarse, durable fabrics . . . APTHORP: Sailcloth! Someone is building a navy! MINION: He specifically does not want sailcloth, but cheaper stuff. APTHORP: Tent cloth! Someone is building an army! Come, let us go and buy all the war-stuff we can find. Exit Apthorp and entourage. RAVENSCAR: So this is the thing Newton's been working on? WATERHOUSE: How could he have produced that without working on it? RAVENSCAR: When I work on things, Daniel, they come out in disjoint