=== CHUNK 40: Words 78001-80000 ===
gravel, were beneath the wheel-rims, and they were passing through guarded gates and across counterweighted canal-bridges. The formal gardens of a small estate spread around them. They rolled to a stop before a gate-house. Daniel glimpsed a hedge and the corner of a fine house before his view out the carriage-window was blocked by the head, and more so by the hat, of a captain of the Blue Guards. 'William Penn,' said William Penn. Then, reluctantly, he added: 'And Dr. Daniel Waterhouse.' THE PLACE WAS BUT A small lodge, close enough to the Hague to be easily reached, but far enough away that the air was clean. William of Orange's asthma did not trouble him when he was here, and so, during those times of the year when he had no choice but to stick at the Hague, this was where he abided. Penn and Waterhouse were ushered to a parlor. It was a raw day outside, and even though a new fire was burning violently on the hearth, making occasional lunges into the room, neither Penn nor Waterhouse made any move to remove his coat. There was a girl there, a petite girl with large blue eyes, and Daniel assumed she was Dutch at first. But after she'd heard the two visitors conversing in English she addressed them in French, and explained something about the Prince of Orange. Penn's French was much better than Daniel's because he had spent a few years exiled to a Protestant college (now extirpated) in Saumur, so he exchanged a few sentences with the girl and then said to Daniel: 'The sand-sailing is excellent today.' 'Could've guessed as much from the wind, I suppose.' 'We'll not be seeing the Prince for another hour.' The two Englishmen stood before the fire until well browned on both sides, then settled into chairs. The girl, who was dressed in a rather bleak Dutch frock, set a pan of milk there to heat, then busied herself with some kitchen-fuss. It was now Daniel's turn to be distracted, for there was something in the girl's appearance that was vaguely disturbing or annoying to him, and the only remedy was to look at her some more, trying to figure it out; which made the feeling worse. Or perhaps better. So they sat there for a while, Penn brooding about the Alleghenies and Waterhouse trying to piece together what it was that provoked him about this girl. The feeling was akin to the nagging sense that he had met a person somewhere before but could not recall the particulars. But that was not it; he was certain that this was the first time. And yet he had that same unscratchable itch. She said something that broke Penn out of his reverie. Penn fixed his gaze upon Daniel. 'The girl is offended,' he said. 'She says that there may be women, of an unspeakable nature, in Amsterdam, who do not object to being looked at as you are looking at her; but how dare you, a visitor on Dutch soil, take such liberties?' 'She said a lot then, in five words of French.' 'She was pithy, for she credits me with wit. I am discursive, for I can extend you no such consideration.' 'You know, merely knuckling under to the King, simply because he waves a Declaration of Indulgence in front of your eyes, is no proof of wit – some would say it proves the opposite.' 'Do you really want another Civil War, Daniel? You and I both grew up during such a war – someof us have elected to move on – otherswant to re-live their childhoods, it seems.' Daniel closed his eyes and saw the image that had been branded onto his retinas thirty-five years ago: Drake hurling a stone saint's head through a stained-glass window, the gaudy image replaced with green English hillside, silvery drizzle reaching in through the aperture like the Holy Spirit, bathing his face. 'I do not think you see what we can make of England now if we only try. I was brought up to believe that an Apocalypse was coming. I have not believed that for many years. But the people who believe in that Apocalypse are my people, and their way of thinking is my way. I have only just come round to a new way of looking at this, a new view-point, as Leibniz would have it. Namely that there is something to the idea of an Apocalypse – a sudden changing of all, an overthrow of old ways – and that Drake and the others merely got the particulars wrong, they fixed on a date certain, they, in a word, idolized. If idolatry is to mistake the symbol for the thing symbolized, then that is what they did with the symbols that are set down in the Book of Revelation. Drake and the others were like a flock of birds who all sense that something is nigh, and take flight as one: a majestic sight and a miracle of Creation. But they were confused, and flew into a trap, and their revolution came to naught. Does that mean that they were mistaken to have spread their wings at all? No, their senses did not deceive them . . . their higher minds did. Should we spurn them forever because they erred? Is their legacy to be laughed at only? On the contrary, I would say that we might bring about the Apocalypse now with a little effort . . . not precisely the one they phant'sied but the same, or better, in its effects.' 'You really should move to Pennsylvania,' Penn mused. 'You are a man of parts, Daniel, and certain of those parts, which will only get you half-hanged, drawn, and quartered in London, would make you a great man in Philadelphia – or at least get you invited to a lot of parties.' 'I've not given up on England just yet, thank you.' 'England may prefer that you give up, rather than suffer another Civil War, or another Bloody Assizes.' 'Much of England sees it otherwise.' 'And you may number me in that party, Daniel, but a scattering of Nonconformists does not suffice to bring about the changes you seek.' 'True . . . but what of the men whose signatures are on these letters?' said Daniel, producing a sheaf of folded parchments, each one be-ribboned and wax-sealed. Penn's mouth shrank to the size of a navel and his mind worked for a minute. The girl came round and served chocolate. 'For you to surprise me in this way was not the act of a gentleman.' 'When Adam delved and Eve span . . .' 'Shut up! Do not trifle with me. Owning Pennsylvania does not make me any better than a Vagabond in the eyes of God, Daniel, but it serves as a reminder that I'm not to be trifled and toyed with.' 'And that, Brother William, is why I nearly killed myself to cross the North Sea on the front of a wind-storm, and galloped through frost and muck to intercept you – beforeyou met with your next King.' Daniel drew out a Hooke-watch and turned its ivory face toward the fire-light. 'There is still time for you to write a letter of your own, and put it on the top of this stack, if you please.' 'IWAS GOING TO ASK, do you have any idea how many people in Amsterdam want to kill you . . . but by coming up here, you seem to've answered the question: no,' said William, Prince of Orange. 'You had fair warning in my letter to d'Avaux, did you not?' 'It barely reached me in time . . . the brunt of the blow was absorbed by some big shareholders there, whom I held off from warning.' 'Francophiles.' 'No, the bottom has quite fallen out of that market, very few Dutchmen are selling themselves to the French nowadays. My chief enemies nowadays are what you would call Dutchmen of limited vision. At any rate, your Batavia charade caused no end of headaches for me.' 'Establishing a first-rate intelligence source at the Court of Louis XIV cannot come cheaply.' 'That insipid truism can be turned around easily: when it comes so dear, then I demand first-rate intelligence. What did you learn from the two Englishmen, by the way?' William glanced at a dirty spoon and flared his nostrils. A Dutch houseboy, fairer and more beautiful than Eliza, bustled over and began to clear away the gleaming, crusted evidence of a long chocolate binge. The clattering of the cups and spoons seemed to irritate William more than gunfire on a battlefield. He leaned back deep into his armchair, closed his eyes, and turned his face toward the fire. To him the world was a dark close cellar with a net-work of covert channels strung through it, frail and irregular as cobwebs, transmitting faint cyphers of intelligence from time to time, and so a fire broadcasting clear strong radiance all directions was a sort of miracle, a pagan god manifesting itself in a spidery Gothick chapel. Eliza did not speak until the boy was finished and the room had gone quiet again and the folds and creases in the prince's face had softened. He was a couple of years shy of forty, but time spent in sun and spray had given him the skin, and battles had given him the mentality, of an older man. 'Both believe the same things, and believe them sincerely,' Eliza said, referring to the two Englishmen. 'Both have been tested by suffering. At first I thought the fat one had been corrupted. But the slender one did not think so.' 'Maybe the slender one is naïve.' 'He is not naïve in that way. No, those two belong to a common sect, or something – they knew and recognized each other. They dislike each other and work at cross-purposes but betrayal, corruption, any straying from whatever common path they have chosen, these are inconceivable. Is it the same sect as Gomer Bolstrood?' 'No and yes. The Puritans are like Hindoos – impossibly various, and yet all of a type.' Eliza nodded. 'Why are you so fascinated by the Puritans?' William asked. It was not asked in a friendly way. He suspected her of some weakness, some occult motive. She looked at him like a little girl who had just been run over by a cart-wheel. It was a look that would cause most men to fall apart like stewed chickens. It didn't work. Eliza had noticed that William of Orange had a lot of gorgeous boys around him. But he also had a mistress, an Englishwoman named Elizabeth Villiers, who was only moderately beautiful, but famously intelligent and witty. The Prince of Orange would never make himself vulnerable by relying on one sex or the other; any lust he might feel for Eliza he could easily channel towards that houseboy, as Dutch farmers manipulated their sluice-gates to water one field instead of another. Or at least that was the message he wanted to convey, by keeping the company he did. Eliza sensed that she had quite inadvertently gotten into danger. William had found an inconsistency in her, and if it weren't explained to his satisfaction, he'd brand her as Enemy. And while Louis XIV kept his enemies in the gilded cage of Versailles, William probably had more forthright ways of dealing with his. The truth wasn't so bad after all. 'I think they are interesting,' she said, finally. 'They are so different from anyone else. So peculiar. But they are not ninehammers, they are formidable in the extreme; Cromwell was only a prelude, a practice. This Penn controls an estate that is stupefyingly vast. New Jersey is a place of Quakers, too, and different sorts of Puritans are all over Massachusetts. Gomer Bolstrood used to say the most startling things . . . overthrowing monarchy was the least