=== CHUNK 36: Words 70001-72000 ===
parts, a lump at a time; this is a unitary whole, like the garment of Our Saviour, seamless . . . what is he going to do in Book III? Raise the dead and ascend into Heaven? WATERHOUSE: He is going to solve the orbit of the moon, provided Flamsteed will part with the requisite data. RAVENSCAR: If Flamsteed doesn't, I'll see to it he parts with his fingernails. God! Here's a catchy bit: 'To every action there is an equal and opposite reaction . . . if you press a stone with your finger, the finger is also pressed by the stone.' The perfection of this work is obvious even to me, Daniel! How must it look to you? WATERHOUSE: If you are going down that road, then ask rather how it looks to Leibniz, for he is as far beyond me as I am beyond you; if Newton is the finger, Leibniz is the stone, and they press against each other with equal and opposite force, a little bit harder every day. RAVENSCAR: But Leibniz has not read it, and you have, so there would be little point in asking him. WATERHOUSE: I have taken the liberty of conveying the essentials to Leibniz, which explains why he is writing so many of these damned letters. RAVENSCAR: But certainly Leibniz would not dare to challenge a work of such radiance! WATERHOUSE: Leibniz is at the disadvantage of not having seen it. Or perhaps we should count this as an advantage, for anyone who sees it is dumbfounded by the brilliance of the geometry, and it is difficult to criticize a man's work when you are down on your knees shielding your eyes. RAVENSCAR: You believe that Leibniz has discovered an error in one of these proofs? WATERHOUSE: No, proofs such as Newton's cannot have errors. RAVENSCAR: Cannot? WATERHOUSE: As a man looks at an apple on a table and says, 'There is an apple on the table,' you may look at these geometrical diagrams of Newton's and say, 'Newton speaks the truth.' RAVENSCAR: Then I'll convey a copy to the Doctor forthwith, so that he may join us on his knees. WATERHOUSE: Don't bother. Leibniz's objection lies not in what Newton has done but in what he has not done. RAVENSCAR: Perhaps we can get Newton to do it in Book III, then, and remove the objection! You have influence with him . . . WATERHOUSE: The ability to annoy Isaac is not to be confused with influence. RAVENSCAR: We will convey Leibniz's objections to him directly, then. WATERHOUSE: You do not grasp the nature of Leibniz's objections. It is not that Newton left some corollary unproved, or failed to follow up on some promising line of inquiry. Turn back, even before the Laws of Motion, and read what Isaac says in his introduction. I can quote it from memory: 'For I here design only to give a mathematical notion of these forces, without considering their physical causes and seats.' RAVENSCAR: What is wrong with that? WATERHOUSE: Some would argue that as Natural Philosophers we are supposed to consider their physical causes and seats! This morning, Roger, I sat in this empty courtyard, in the midst of a whirlwind. The whirlwind was invisible; how did I know 'twas here? Because of the motion it conferred on innumerable scraps of paper, which orbited round me. Had I thought to bring along my instruments I could have taken observations and measured the velocities and plotted the trajectories of those scraps, and if I were as brilliant as Isaac I could have drawn all of those data together into a single unifying picture of the whirlwind. But if I were Leibniz I'd have done none of those things. Instead I'd have asked, Why is the whirlwind here? ENTR'ACTE Noises off: A grave Procession ascending Fish Street Hill, coming from the TOWER OF LONDON. Traders exhibit startlement and dismay as the Procession marches into the Exchange, disrupting Commerce. Enter first two platoons of the King's Own Black Torrent Guards, armed with muskets, affixed to the muzzles whereof are long stabbing-weapons in the style recently adopted by the French Army, and nominated by thembayonets. Leveling these, the soldiers clear all traders from the center of the ‘Change, and compel them to form up in concentric ranks, like spectators gathered round an impromptu Punchinello-show at a fair. Enter now trumpeters and drummers, followed by a HERALD bellowing legal gibberish. As drummers beat a slow and dolorous cadence, enter JACK KETCH in a black hood. The assembled traders are silent as the dead. Jack Ketch walks slowly into the center of the empty space and stands with arms folded. Enter now a wagon drawn by a black horse and loaded with faggots and jars, flanked by the ASSISTANTS of Jack Ketch. Assistants pile the wood on the ground and then soak it with oil poured from the jars. Enter now BAILIFF carrying a BOOK bound up in chains and padlocks. JACK KETCH: In the name of the King, stop and identify yourself! BAILIFF: John Bull, a bailiff. JACK KETCH: State your business. BAILIFF: It is the King's business. I have here a prisoner to be bound over for execution. JACK KETCH: What is the prisoner's name? BAILIFF: A History of the Late Massacres and Persecutions of the French Huguenots; to which is appended a brief relation of the bloody and atrocious crimes recently visited upon blameless Protestants dwelling in the realms of the Duke of Savoy, at the behest of King Louis XIV of France. JACK KETCH: Has this prisoner been accused of a crime? BAILIFF: Not only accused, but justly convicted, of spreading contumacious falsehoods, attempting to arouse civil discord, and leveling many base slanders against the good name of The Most Christian King Louis XIV, a true friend of our own King and a loyal ally of England. JACK KETCH: Vile crimes, indeed! Has a sentence been pronounced? BAILIFF: Indeed, as I mentioned before, it has been ordered by Lord Jeffreys that the prisoner is to be bound over to you for immediate execution. JACK KETCH: Then I'll welcome him as I did the late Duke of Monmouth. Jack Ketch advances toward the Bailiff and grips the end of the chain. The bailiff drops the Book and dusts off his hands. To a slow cadence of muffled drums, Jack Ketch marches to the wood-pile, dragging the book across the pavement behind him. He heaves the book onto the top of the pile, steps back, and accepts a torch from an assistant. JACK KETCH: Any last words, villainous Book? No? Very well, then to hell with thee! Lights the fire. Traders, Soldiers, Musicians, Executioner's Staff, &c. watch silently as the Book is consumed by the flames. Exeunt Bailiff, Herald, Executioners, Musicians, and Soldiers, leaving behind a smouldering heap of coals. Traders resume commerce as if nothing had happened, save for EDMUND PALLING, an old man. PALLING: Mr. Waterhouse! From the fact that you are the only one who brought something to sit on, may I assume you knew that this shameful poppet-show would disgrace the ‘Change today? WATERHOUSE: That would appear to be the unspoken message. PALLING: Unspokenis an interesting word . . . what of the truths that were spoken in the late Book, concerning the persecutions of our brethren in France and Savoy? Have they now been unspoken because the pages were burnt? WATERHOUSE: I have heard many a sermon in my life, Mr. Palling, and I know where this one is bound . . . you're going to say that just as the immortal spirit departs the body to be one with God, so the contents of the late Book are now going to wherever its smoke is distributed by the four winds . . . say, weren't you Massachusetts-bound? PALLING: I am only bating until I have raised money for the passage, and would probably be finished by now if Jack Ketch had not muddied and stirred the subtle currents of the market. Exits. Enter Sir Richard Apthorp. APTHORP: Burning books . . . is that not a favorite practice of the Spanish Inquisition? WATERHOUSE: I have never been to Spain, Sir Richard, and so the only way I know that they burn books is because of the vast number of books that have been published on the subject. APTHORP: Hmmm, yes . . . I take your meaning. WATERHOUSE: I beg of you, do not say ‘I take your meaning' with such ponderous significance . . . I do not wish to be Jack Ketch's next guest. You have asked, sir, over and over, why I am sitting here in a chair. Now you know the answer: I came to see justice done. APTHORP: But you knew ‘twould happen – you had aught to do with it. Why did you set it in the ‘Change? At Tyburn tree, during one of the regularly scheduled Friday hangings, ‘twould've drawn a much more appreciative crowd – why, you could burn a whole library there and the Mobb would be stomping their feet for an encore. WATERHOUSE: They don't read books. The point would've been lost on 'em. APTHORP: If the point is to put the fear of God into literate men, why not burn it at Cambridge and Oxford? WATERHOUSE: Jack Ketch hates to travel. The new carriages have so little leg-room, and his great Axe does not fit into the luggage bins . . . APTHORP: Could it be because College men do not have the money and power to organize a rebellion? WATERHOUSE: Why, yes, that's it. No point intimidating the weak. Threaten the dangerous. APTHORP: To what end? To keep them in line? Or to put thoughts of rebellion into their minds? WATERHOUSE: Your question, sir, amounts to asking whether I am a turncoat against the cause of my forebears – corrupted by the fœtid atmosphere of Whitehall – or a traitorous organizer of a secret rebellion. APTHORP: Why, yes, I suppose it does. WATERHOUSE: Then would you please ask easier questions or else go away and leave me alone? For whether I'm a back-stabber or a Phanatique, I am in either case no longer a scholar to be trifled with. If you must ply someone with such questions, ask them of yourself; if you insist on an answer, unburden your secrets to me before you ask me to trust you with mine. Assuming I have any. APTHORP: I think that you do, sir. Bows. WATERHOUSE: Why do you doff your hat to me thus? APTHORP: To honor you, sir, and to pay my respects to him who made you. WATERHOUSE: What, Drake? APTHORP: Why, no, I refer to your Mentor, the late John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester – or as some would say, the living incarnation of Janus. For that good fellow penned the Cryptonomicon with one hand and the Universal Character with the other; he was a good friend of high and mighty Cavaliers at the same time he was wooing and marrying Cromwell's own sister; and, in sum, was Janus-like in diverse ways I'll not bother enumerating to you. For you are truly his pupil, his creation: one moment dispensing intelligence like a Mercury, the next keeping counsel like Pluto. WATERHOUSE: Mentor was a guise adopted by Minerva, and her pupil was great Ulysses, and so by hewing to a strict Classical interpretation of your words, sir, I'll endeavour not to take offense. APTHORP: Endeavour and succeed, my good man, for no offense was meant. Good day. Exits. Enter Ravenscar, carryingPrincipia Mathematica. RAVENSCAR: I'm taking this to the printer's straightaway, but before I do, I was pondering this Newton/Leibniz thing . . . WATERHOUSE: What!? Jack Ketch's performance made no impression on you at all? RAVENSCAR: Oh, that? I assume you arranged it that way in order to buttress your position as the King's token Puritan bootlick – whilst in fact stirring rebellious spirits in