=== CHUNK 3: Words 4001-6000 ===
Men are walking aboard hugging baskets of loaves so fresh they're steaming. Enoch turns back toward the shore to read the level of the tide from a barnacled pile, then turns the other way to check the phase and altitude of the moon. Tide will be going out soon, and Minerva will probably want to ride it. Enoch finally spies van Hoek standing on the foredeck, doing some paperwork on the top of a barrel, and through some kind of action-at-a-distance wills him to look up and notice him, down on the ferry. Van Hoek looks his way and stiffens. Enoch makes no outward sign, but stares him in the eye long enough to give him second thoughts about pushing for a hasty departure. A colonist in a black hat is attempting to make friends with one of the Africans, who doesn't speak much English – but this is no hindrance, the white man has taught himself a few words of some African tongue. The slave is very dark, and the arms of the King of Spain are branded into his left shoulder, and so he is probably Angolan. Life has been strange to him: abducted by Africans fiercer than he, chained up in a hole in Luanda, marked with a hot iron to indicate that duty had been paid on him, loaded onto a ship, and sent to a cold place full of pale men. After all of that, you'd think that nothing could possibly surprise him. But he's astonished by whatever this Barker is telling him. The Barker's punching at the air and becoming quite exercised, and not just because he is inarticulate. Assuming that he has been in touch with his brethren in London (and that is a very good assumption), he is probably telling the Angolan that he, and all of the other slaves, are perfectly justified in taking up arms and mounting a violent rebellion. 'Your mount is very fine. Did you bring him from Europe?' 'No, Ben. Borrowed him in New Amsterdam. New York, I mean.' 'Why'd you sail to New York if the man you seek's in Boston?' 'The next America-bound ship from the Pool of London happened to be headed thither.' 'You're in a terrible hurry, then!' 'I shall be in a terrible hurry to toss you over the side if you continue to draw such inferences.' This quiets Ben, but only long enough for him to circle round and probe Enoch's defenses from another quarter: 'The owner of this horse must be a very dear friend of yours, to lend you such a mount.' Enoch must now be a bit careful. The owner's a gentleman of quality in New York. If Enoch claims his friendship, then proceeds to make a bloody hash of things in Boston, it could deal damage to the gentleman's repute. 'It is not so much that he is a friend. I'd never met him until I showed up at his door a few days ago.' Ben can't fathom it. 'Then why'd he even admit you to his house? By your leave, sir, looking as you do, and armed. Why'd he lend you such a worthy stallion?' 'He let me in to his house because there was a riot underway, and I requested sanctuary.' Enoch gazes over at the Barker, then sidles closer to Ben. 'Here is a wonder for you: When my ship reached New York, we were greeted by the spectacle of thousands of slaves – some Irish, the rest Angolan – running through the streets with pitchforks and firebrands. Lobsterbacks tromping after them in leapfrogging blocks, firing volleys. The white smoke of their muskets rose and mingled with the black smoke of burning warehouses to turn the sky into a blazing, spark-shot melting-pot, wondrous to look at but, as we supposed, unfit to support life. Our pilot had us stand a-loof until the tide forced his hand. We put in at a pier that seemed to be under the sway of the redcoats. 'Anyway,' Enoch continues – for his discourse is beginning to draw unwanted notice – “that's how I got in the door. He lent me the horse because he and I are Fellows in the same Society, and I am here, in a way, to do an errand for that Society.' 'Is it a Society of Barkers, like?' asks Ben, stepping in close to whisper, and glancing at the one who's proselytizing the slave. For by now Ben has taken note of Enoch's various pistols and blades, and matched him with tales his folk have probably told him concerning that fell Sect during their halcyon days of Cathedral-sacking and King-killing. 'No, it is a society of philosophers,' Enoch says, before the boy's phant'sies wax any wilder. 'Philosophers, sir!' Enoch had supposed the boy should be disappointed. Instead he's thrilled. So Enoch was correct: the boy's dangerous. ' NaturalPhilosophers. Not, mind you, the other sort – ' 'Unnatural?' 'An apt coinage. Some would say it's the unnatural philosophers that are to blame for Protestants fighting Protestants in England and Catholics everywhere else.' 'What, then, is a Natural Philosopher?' 'One who tries to prevent his ruminations from straying, by hewing to what can be observed, and proving things, when possible, by rules of logic.' This gets him nowhere with Ben. 'Rather like a Judge in a Court, who insists on facts, and scorns rumor, hearsay, and appeals to sentiment. As when your own Judges finally went up to Salem and pointed out that the people there were going crazy.' Ben nods. Good. 'What is the name of your Clubb?' 'The Royal Society of London.' 'One day I shall be a Fellow of it, and a Judge of such things.' 'I shall nominate you the moment I get back, Ben.' 'Is it a part of your code that members must lend each other horses in time of need?' 'No, but it is a rule that they must pay dues – for which there is ever a need – and this chap had not paid his dues in many a year. Sir Isaac – who is the President of the Royal Society – looks with disfavor on such. I explained to the gentleman in New York why it was a Bad Idea to land on Sir Isaac's Shit List – by your leave, by your leave – and he was so convinced by my arguments that he lent me his best riding-horse without further suasion.' 'He's a beauty,' Ben says, and strokes the animal's nose. The stallion mistrusted Ben at first for being small, darting, and smelling of long-dead beasts. Now he has accepted the boy as an animated hitching-post, capable of performing a few services such as nose-scratching and fly-shooing. The ferryman is more amused than angry when he discovers a Barker conspiring with his slave, and shoos him away. The Barker identifies Enoch as fresh meat, and begins trying to catch his eye. Enoch moves away from him and pretends to study the approaching shore. The ferry is maneuvering around a raft of immense logs drifting out of the estuary, each marked with the King's Arrow – going to build ships for the Navy. Inland of Charlestown spreads a loose agglomeration of hamlets conjoined by a network of cowpaths. The largest cowpath goes all the way to Newtowne, where Harvard College is. But most of it just looks like a forest, smoking without being burned, spattered with muffled whacks of axes and hammers. Occasional musket shots boom in the distance and are echoed from hamlet to hamlet – some kind of system for relaying information across the countryside. Enoch wonders how he's ever going to find Daniel in all that. He moves toward a talkative group that has formed on the center of the ferry's deck, allowing the less erudite (for these must be Harvard men) to break the wind for them. It is a mix of pompous sots and peering quick-faced men basting their sentences together with bad Latin. Some of them have a dour Puritan look about them, others are dressed in something closer to last year's London mode. A pear-shaped, red-nosed man in a tall gray wig seems to be the Don of this jury-rigged College. Enoch catches this one's eye and lets him see that he's bearing a sword. This is not a threat, but an assertion of status. 'A gentleman traveler from abroad joins us. Welcome, sir, to our humble Colony!' Enoch goes through the requisite polite movements and utterances. They show a great deal of interest in him, a sure sign that not much new and interesting is going on at Harvard College. But the place is only some three-quarters of a century old, so how much can really be happening there? They want to know if he's from a Germanic land; he says not really. They guess that he has come on some Alchemical errand, which is an excellent guess, but wrong. When it is polite to do so, he tells them the name of the man he has come to see. He's never heard such scoffing. They are, to a man, pained that a gentleman should've crossed the North Atlantic, and now the Charles Basin, only to spoil the journey by meeting with that fellow. 'I know him not,' Enoch lies. 'Then let us prepare you, sir!' one of them says. 'Daniel Waterhouse is a man advanced in years, but the years have been less kind to him than you.' 'He is correctly addressed as Dr. Waterhouse, is he not?' Silence ruined by stifled gurgles. 'I do not presume to correct any man,' Enoch says, 'only to be sure that I give no offense when I encounter the fellow in person.' 'Indeed, he is accounted a Doctor,' says the pear-shaped Don, 'but – ' 'Of what?' someone asks. 'Gears,' someone suggests, to great hilarity. 'Nay, nay!' says the Don, shouting them down, in a show of false goodwill. 'For all of his gears are to no purpose without a primum mobile, a source of motive power – ' 'The Franklin boy!' and all turn to look at Ben. 'Today it might be young Ben, tomorrow perhaps little Godfrey Waterhouse will step into Ben's shoes. Later perhaps a rodent on a tread-mill. But in any case, the vis viva is conducted into Dr. Waterhouse's gear-boxes by – what? Anyone?' The Don cups a hand to an ear Socratically. 'Shafts?' someone guesses. 'Cranks!' another shouts. 'Ah, excellent! Our colleague Waterhouse is, then, a Doctor of – what?' 'Cranks!' says the entire College in unison. 'And so devoted is our Doctor of Cranks to his work that he quite sacrifices himself,' says the Don admiringly. 'Going many days uncovered – ' 'Shaking the gear-filings from his sleeves when he sits down to break bread – ' 'Better than pepper – ' 'And cheafer!' 'Are you, perhaps, coming to join his Institute, then?' 'Or foreclose on't?' Too hilarious. 'I have heard of his Institute, but know little of it,' Enoch Root says. He looks over at Ben, who has gone red in the neck and ears, and turned his back on all to nuzzle the horse. 'Many learned scholars are in the same state of ignorance – be not ashamed.' 'Since he came to America, Dr. Waterhouse has been infected with the local influenza, whose chief symptom is causing men to found new projects and endeavours, rather than going to the trouble of remedying the old ones.' 'He's not entirely satisfied with Harvard College then!?' Enoch says wonderingly. 'Oh, no! He has founded – ' “ – and personally endowed:' “ – and laid the cornerstone – ' “ – corner-log, if truth be told – ' “ – of – what does he call it?' 'The Massachusetts Bay Colony Institute of Technologickal Arts.' 'Where might I find Dr. Waterhouse's Institute?' Enoch inquires. 'Midway from Charlestown to Harvard. Follow the sound of grinding gears ‘til you come to America's smallest and
