=== CHUNK 26: Words 50001-52000 ===
will consult my faithful Mercury.' Daniel stood up and turned around. He thought for a moment that Hooke was asking him to fetch some quicksilver (Hooke drank it from time to time, as a remedy for headaches, vertigo, and other complaints). But Hooke's giant eyes were focused on the Microscope instead. 'Of course!' Daniel said. Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods – bringer of information. 'What think you now of needles?' Hooke asked. Daniel plucked the needle away and held it up before the window, viewing it in a new light. 'Its appearance is almost physically disgusting,' he said. 'A razor looks worse. It is all kinds of shapes, except what it should be,' Hooke said. 'That is why I never use the Microscope any more to look at things that were made by men – the rudeness and bungling of Art is painful to view. And yet things that one would expect to look disgusting become beautiful when magnified – you may look at my drawings while I satisfy the King's curiosity.' Hooke gestured to a stack of papers, then carried a sample ant-egg over to the microscope as Daniel began to page through them. 'Sir. I did not know that you were an artist,' Daniel said. 'When my father died, I was apprenticed to a portrait-painter,' Hooke said. 'Your master taught you well – ' 'The ass taught me nothing, ' Hooke said. 'Anyone who is not a half-wit can learn all there is to know of painting, by standing in front of paintings and looking at them. What was the use, then, of being an apprentice?' 'This flea is a magnificent piece of – ' 'It is not art but a higher form of bungling, ' Hooke demurred. 'When I viewed that flea under the microscope, I could see, in its eye, a complete and perfect reflection of John Comstock's gardens and manor-house – the blossoms on his flowers, the curtains billowing in his windows.' 'It's magnificent to me,' Daniel said. He was sincere – not trying to be a Flattering Parasite or Crafty Knave. But Hooke only became irritated. 'I tell you again. True beauty is to be found in natural forms. The more we magnify, and the closer we examine, the works of Artifice, the grosser and stupider they seem. But if we magnify the natural world it only becomes more intricate and excellent.' Wilkins had asked Daniel which he preferred: Wren's glass apiary, or the bees' honeycomb inside of it. Then he had warned Daniel that Hooke was coming into earshot. Now Daniel understood why: for Hooke there could only be one answer. 'I defer to you, sir.' 'Thank you, sir.' 'But without seeming to be a Cavilling Jesuit, I should like to know whether Wilkins's urine is a product of Art or Nature.' 'You saw the jar.' 'Yes.' 'If you take the Rev.'s urine and pour off the fluid and examine what remains under the Microscope, you will see a hoard of jewels that would make the Great Mogul swoon. At lower magnification it seems nothing more than a heap of gravel, but with a better lens, and brighter light, it is revealed as a mountain of crystals – plates, rhomboids, rectangles, squares – white and yellow and red ones, gleaming like the diamonds in a courtier's ring.' 'Is that true of everyone's urine?' 'It is more true of his than of most people's,' Hooke said. 'Wilkins has the stone.' 'Oh, God!' 'It is not so bad now, but it grows within him, and will certainly kill him in a few years,' Hooke said. 'And the stone in his bladder is made of the same stuff as these crystals that you see in his urine?' 'I believe so.' 'Is there some way to – ' 'To dissolve it? Oil of vitriol works – but I don't suppose that our Reverend wants to have that introduced into his bladder. You are welcome to make investigations of your own. I have tried all of the obvious things.' WORD ARRIVED THAT FERMAT had died, leaving behind a theorem or two that still needed proving. King Philip of Spain died, too, and his son succeeded him; but the new King Carlos II was sickly, and not expected to live to the end of the year. Portugal was independent. Someone named Lubomirski was staging a rebellion in Poland. John Wilkins was trying to make horse-drawn vehicles more efficient; to test them, he had rigged up a weight on a rope, above a well, so that when the weight fell down into the well, it would drag his chariots across the ground. Their progress could then be timed using one of Hooke's watches. That duty fell to Charles Comstock, who spent many days standing out in the field making trials or fixing broken wheels. His father's servants needed the well to draw water for livestock, and so Charles was frequently called out to move the contraption out of the way. Daniel enjoyed watching all of this, out the window, while he worked on Punishments: PUNISHMENTS CAPITAL ARE THE VARIOUS MANNERS OF PUTTING MEN TO DEATH IN A JUDICIAL WAY, WHICH IN SEVERALN ATIONS ARE, OR HAVE BEEN, EITHER S IMPLE ; BY Separation of the parts; Head from Body: BEHEADING, strike of one's head Member from Member: QUARTERING, Dissecting. Wound At distance, whether from hand: STONING, Pelting from Instrument, as Gun, Bow, &c.: SHOOTING. At hand, either by Weight; of something else: PRESSING. of one's own: PRECIPITATING, Defenestration, casting headlong. Weapon; any way: STABBING direct upwards: EMPALING Taking away necessary Diet: or giving that which is noxious STARVING, famishing POISONING, Venom, envenom, virulent Interception of the air at theMouth in the air: stifling, smother, suffocate. in the Earth: BURYING ALIVE in water: DROWNING in fire: BURNING ALIVE at theThroat by weight of a man's own body: HANGING by the strength of others: STRANGLING, throttle, choke, suffocate MIXED OF WOUNDING AND STARVING; THE BODY BEING Erect : CRUCIFYING Lying on a Wheel : BREAKING ON THE WHEEL PUNISHMENTS NOT CAPITAL ARE DISTINGUISHED BY THE THINGS OR SUBJECTS RECEIVING DETRIMENT BY THEM, AS BEING EITHER OF THE BODY; according to theGeneral name; signifying great pain: TORTURE according to special kinds: byStriking; with a limber instrument: WHIPPING, lashing, scourging, leashing, rod, slash, switch, stripe, Beadle with a stiff instrument: CUDGELLING, bastinado, baste, swinge, swaddle, shrubb, slapp, thwack; byStretching of the limbs violently; the body being laid along: RACK the body lifted up into the Air: STRAPPADO LIBERTY ;OF WHICH ONE IS DEPRIVED, BY RESTRAINT into a place: IMPRISONMENT, Incarceration, Durance, Custody, Ward, clap up, commit, confine, mure, Pound, Pinfold, Gaol, Cage, Set fast anInstrument: BONDS, fetters, gyves, shackles, manicles, pinion, chains. Out of a place or country, whether with allowance of any other: EXILE, banishment confinement to one other: RELEGATION Repute, whether more gently: INFAMIZATION, Ignominy, Pillory more severely by burning marks in one's flesh: STIGMATIZATION, Branding, Cauterizing Estate; whether in part: MULCT, fine, sconce in whole: CONFISCATION, forfeiture Dignity and power;by depriving one of his degree: DEGRADING, deposing, depriving his capacity to bear office: INCAPACITATING, cashier, disable, discard, depose, disfranchize. As Daniel scourged, bastinadoed, racked, and strappadoed his mind, trying to think of punishments that he and Wilkins had missed, he heard Hooke striking sparks with flint and steel, and went down to investigate. Hooke was aiming the sparks at a blank sheet of paper. 'Mark where they strike,' he said to Daniel. Daniel hovered with a pen, and whenever an especially large spark hit the paper, he drew a tight circle around it. They examined the paper under the Microscope, and found, in the center of each circle, a remnant: a more or less complete hollow sphere of what was obviously steel. 'You see that the Alchemists' conception of heat is ludicrous,' Hooke said. 'There is no Element of Fire. Heat is really nothing more than a brisk agitation of the parts of a body – hit a piece of steel with a rock hard enough, and a bit of steel is torn away – ' 'And that is the spark?' 'That is the spark.' 'But why does the spark emit light?' 'The force of the impact agitates its parts so vehemently that it becomes hot enough to melt.' 'Yes, but if your hypothesis is correct – if there is no Element of Fire, only a jostling of internal parts – then why should hot things emit light?' 'I believe that light consists of vibrations. If the parts move violently enough, they emit light – just as a struck bell vibrates to produce sound.' Daniel supposed that was all there was to that, until he went with Hooke to collect samples of river insects one day, and they squatted in a place where a brook tumbled over the brink of a rock into a little pool. Bubbles of water, forced beneath the pool by the falling water, rose to the surface: millions of tiny spheres. Hooke noticed it, pondered for a few moments, and said: 'Planets and stars are spheres, for the same reason that bubbles and sparks are.' 'What!?' 'A body of fluid, surrounded by some different fluid, forms into a sphere.Thus: air surrounded by water makes a sphere, which we call a bubble. A tiny bit of molten steel surrounded by air makes a sphere, which we call a spark. Molten earth surrounded by the Cœlestial Æther makes a sphere, which we call a planet.' And on the way back, as they were watching a crescent moon chase the sun below the horizon, Hooke said, 'If we could make sparks, or flashes of light, bright enough, we could see their light reflected off the shadowed part of that moon later, and reckon the speed of light.' 'If we did it with gunpowder,' Daniel reflected, 'John Comstock would be happy to underwrite the experiment.' Hooke turned and regarded him for a few moments with a cold eye, as if trying to establish whether Daniel, too, was made up out of cells. 'You are thinking like a courtier,' he said. There was no emotion in his voice; he was stating, not an opinion, but a fact. The chief Design of the aforementioned Club, was to propagate new Whims, advance mechanic Exercises, and to promote useless, as well as useful Experiments. In order to carry on this commendable Undertaking, any frantic Artist, chemical Operator, or whimsical Projector, that had but a Crotchet in their Heads, or but dream'd themselves into some strange fanciful Discovery, might be kindly admitted, as welcome Brethren, into this teeming Society, where each Member was respected, not according to his Quality, but the searches he had made into the Mysteries of Nature, and the Novelties, though Trifles, that were owing to his Invention: So that a Mad-man, who had beggar'd himself by his Bellows and his Furnaces, in a vain pursuit of the Philosopher's Stone; or the crazy Physician who had wasted his Patrimony, by endeavouring to recover that infallible Nostrum, Sal Graminis , from the dust and ashes of a burnt Hay-cock, were as much reverenc'd here, as those mechanic Quality, who, to shew themselves Vertuoso's , would sit turning of Ivory above in their Garrets, whilst their Ladies below Stairs, by the help of their He-Cousins, were providing Horns for their Families. – NED WARD, The Vertuoso's Club THE LEAVES WERE TURNING, the Plague in London was worse. Eight thousand people died in a week. A few miles away in Epsom, Wilkins had finished the Ark digression and begun to draw up a grammar, and a system of writing, for his Philosophical Language. Daniel was finishing some odds and ends, viz. Nautical Objects: Seams and Spurkets, Parrels and Jears, Brales and Bunt-Lines. His mind wandered. Below him, a strange plucking sound, like a man endlessly tuning a lute. He went down stairs and found Hooke sitting there with a few inches of quill sticking out of his ear, plucking a string stretched over a wooden