=== CHUNK 83: Words 164001-166000 ===
themselves. On the contrary, it seems as though a lot of people like to explain things on the Internet, and some of them are quite good at it. The problem lies in how these explanations are organized. We have been looking for a way to get an explanation system seeded for a long time, and it occurred to us that a set of annotations to my book might be one way to get it started. At first, the explanations here will be strongly tied to characters and situations in Quicksilver and so may be of only limited interest to those who have not read the book. However, with a few clicks we might move on to more general explanations. For example,Robert Hooke andRobert Boyle appear as characters in Quicksilver , and so early on we might see annotations concerning specific things that they are shown doing in the book. But later these might link to explanations ofBoyle's Law.Such an explanation need not refer to Quicksilver in any way, and so it could be useful to, say, a high school student who has never heard of me or my book but who needs to understand Boyle's Law and why it is important. What it boils down to is this: if you have come here hoping to get an explanation of something that puzzles you about Quicksilver , then this site should serve that purpose. If you don't find an existing annotation that answers your question, you can request that I or someone else write one and post it. Along the way, as you browse the site, you may stumble over a lot of information that seems to have nothing to do with the novel. This material has probably been put there by contributors who have decided to post explanations of things that they care and know about. Feel free to ignore, browse, or contribute to any of it as the spirit moves you. – Neal Stephenson, 2003 QuicksilverDramatis Personae by Typehttp://www.metaweb.com/wiki/wiki.phtml?title=Stephenson:Neal:Quicksilver:List_of_people This is a list of the dramatis personae in Quicksilver who have entries in the Metaweb. As this list grows, we may group people by family, region, religion, language, title or noble status, or other methods. Clearly Major Characters Jack Shaftoe Eliza Daniel Waterhouse Enoch Root Natural Philosophers Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz Isaac Newton Spinoza Thomas More Anglesey Robert Hooke John Wilkins Nicolas Fatio de Duillier Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit Aristocrats and Politicians James I of England Oliver Cromwell Charles I of England Charles II James II of England Monmouth William of Orange Queen Anne George I of Great Britain Princess Caroline King George II of Great Britain Louis Anglesey, Earl of Upnor Louis Joseph, Duke of Vendôme (duchesse d')Oyonnax (Comte) d'Avaux (Duc) d'Arcachon Etienne d'Arcachon Edouard de Gex Bonaventure Rossignol King Phillip the V of Spain Businessmen Gomer Bolstrood Knott Bolstrood John Comstock Roger Comstock Foot Sluys Yevgeny (the Raskolnik) Very Minor Characters People mentioned only a few times with only a tiny part in the narrative. Arlanc Elias Ashmole (comte de) Béziers Beatrice Béziers Louis Béziers Mary Dolores Jack Ketch (marquise d')Ozoir Danny Shaftoe Jimmy Shaftoe Mother Shaftoe See also List of notable Baroque figures About the Author NEALSTEPHENSONissueth from a Clan of yeomen, itinerant Parsons, ingenieurs , and Natural Philosophers that hath long dwelt in bucolick marches and rural Shires of his native Land, and trod the Corridors of her 'Varsities. At a young age, finding himself in a pretty Humour for the writing of Romances, and discourse of Natural Philosophy and Technologick Arts, he took up the Pen, and hath not since laid it down. Quicksilver:Critical Acclaimfor Volume One of the Baroque Cycle TIME:“Genius. (That's right, I'm using the g-word.) ... You'll wish it were longer.' Entertainment Weekly:“[A] warm, loamy novel of ideas, adventure, science and politics ... The great trick of Quicksilver is that it makes you ponder concepts and theories you initially think you'll never understand, and it's greatest pleasure is that Stephenson is such an enthralling explainer ... Stephenson's new machine is a wonderment to behold. A-' Wired:“Neal Stephenson rewrites history: for the dark prince of hacker fiction, looking backward is another way of seeing the future.' Seattle Times:“Because of his subject matter, Stephenson won't lose his usual science-lovers. He'll pick up some history buffs as well, and his quirky characters, zestful pace, and wryly humorous tone will charm almost everyone else... Stephenson's aim is more than an entertaining account of remarkable personalities. Quicksilver's panoramic view encompasses the bitter religious and political struggles which gave rise to the scientific way of thought. [ Quicksilveris] a sprawling, engrossing tale.' Men's Journal:“ Quicksilver... tosses its three main characters into the bubbling cauldron of science and intrigue that Stephenson, like a mad alchemist, has cooked up in his lab... [A] swashbuckling pirate battle, for example, dares any reader to put down the novel and gives Quicksilver ... the decadent pacing of a beach thriller.' Newsweek:“Sprawling, irreverent, and ultimately profound.' Slate:“ Quicksilverinfuses old-school science and engineering with a badly needed dose of swashbuckling adventure, complete with a professor-versus-the-pirates battle at sea. Who knew the Natural Philosophers were so cool?' Library Journal(starred review):“Sparkling prose, subtle humor, and a superb knowledge of the period makes this grand feast of a novel a mandatory choice ... highly recommended.' Salon:“We expect nothing less from Neal Stephenson than sustained ecstatic zaniness... As seen through Stephenson's eyes the late seventeenth century is endlessly fascinating, and so is the focus on the intersection of religion and science... The late seventeenth century saw an explosion of intellectual brilliance that resembles nothing so much as it does an overflow from a boiling cauldron. So does Quicksilver .' Publishers Weekly:“Stephenson, once best known for his techno-geek SF novel Snow Crash , skillfully reimagines empiricists Newton, Hooke, and Leibniz, and creatively retells the birth of the scientific revolution. He has a strong feel for history and a knack for bringing settings to life. Expect high interest in this title, as much for its size and ambition, which make it a publishing event...' Pages:“The joy of entering le monde Stephenson is that of surrender. Give up any and all preconceived notions of historical consistency, linear scientific progress, and fail-safe happy endings, and you'll enjoy the ride ... you'll be begging for more.' ALSO BY NEAL STEPHENSON Cryptonomicon The Diamond Age Snow Crash Zodiac Credits Maps by Nick Springer Family trees created by Lisa Gold, illustrated by Jane S. Kim Conic sections illustration, a digital recomposition of eight figures from Claude Richard's 1655 edition of Apollonius of Perga's Conic Sections, by Alvy Ray Smith Case stamp art by Laura Hartman Maestro Jacket design by Richard L. Aquan Jacket illustration from Mary Evans Picture Library Map of 1667 London reproduced with changes courtesy of Historic Urban Plans, Inc. Refracting sphere illustration from the facsimile edition of Robert Hooke's Philosophical Experiments and Observations, edited by W. Derham. Published by Frank Cass & Co., Ltd., London, 1967. Flea illustration from Robert Hooke's 1665 Micrographia reprinted by permission of Octavo, www.octavo.com. Illustrations from Isaac Newton's 1729 Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy courtesy of Primary Source Microfilm. This book is a work of fiction. References to real people, events, establishments, organizations, or locales are intended only to provide a sense of authenticity, and are used fictitiously. All other characters, and all incidents and dialogue, are drawn from the author's imagination and are not to be construed as real. QUICKSILVER. Copyright © 2003 by Neal Stephenson. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of PerfectBound™. "Interview." Copyright © 2003 by Neal Stephenson "Quicksilver Metaweb: Introduction" and "Quicksilver Dramatis Personae" are licensed under the terms described below. Metaweb: Copyrights: From the Quicksilver Metaweb: The goal of the Metaweb is to create an information source that is freely available. The license we use grants free access to our content in the same sense as free software is licensed freely. That is to say, Metaweb content can be copied, modified, and redistributed so long as the new version grants the same freedoms to others and acknowledges the Metaweb as the source. Metaweb entries therefore will remain free forever and can be used by anybody subject to certain restrictions, most of which serve to ensure that freedom. To fulfill the above goals, the text contained in the Metaweb is licensed to the public under the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL). Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify the text of all Metaweb materials under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts. For the full license, see the metaweb:GNU free documentation license: http://www.metaweb.com/wiki/wiki.phtml?title=Metaweb:GNU_free_documentation_license See also the Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc. Microsoft Reader March 2004 ISBN 0-06-074831-1 FIRST EDITION 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 About the Publisher Australia HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia http://www.perfectbound.com.au Canada HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada http://www.perfectbound.ca New Zealand HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited P.O. Box 1 Auckland, New Zealand http://www.harpercollins.co.nz United Kingdom HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 77-85 Fulham Palace Road London, W6 8JB, UK http://www.uk.perfectbound.com United States HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 10 East 53rd Street New York, NY 10022 http://www.perfectbound.com * Son of Praise-God W., son of Raleigh W., son of Drakehence, some sort of nephew to Daniel. * In England, the Civil War that brought Cromwell to power, and on the Continent, the Thirty Years War. * Counterfeits made of base metals such as copper and lead. * The forecastledeck is the short deck that, towards the ships bow, is built above the upperdeck. * Praise-God W. being the eldest son of Raleigh W., and hence Drake W.s first grandchild; he had recently sailed to Boston at he age of sixteen to study at Harvard, become part of that City on the Hill that was America, and, if possible, return in glory at some future time to drive Archbishop Lauds spawn from England and reform the Anglican Church once and for all. * King Charles II of England. * Usually the Pope, but in this context, King Louis XIV of France. * The consensus of the best physicians in the Royal Society was that plague was not caused by bad air, but had something to do with being crowded together with many other people, especially foreigners (the first victims of the London plague had been Frenchmen fresh off the boat, whod died in an inn about five hundred yards from Drakes house), however, everyone breathed through scarves anyway. * Which had been pro-Cromwell. * Which had nothing to do with Jews; it was named partly after its location in a part of the city where Jews had lived before they had been kicked out of England in 1290 by Edward I. For Jews to exist in a Catholic or Anglican country was theoretically impossible because the entire country was divided into parishes, and every person who lived in a given parish, by definition, was a member of the parish church, which collected tithes, recorded births and deaths, and enforced regular attendance at services. This general sort of arrangement was called theEstablished Church and was why dissidents like Drake had no logical choice but to espouse the concept of theGathered Church , which drew like-minded persons from an arbitrary geographical territory. In making it legallypossible for Gathered Churches to exist, Cromwell had, in effect, re-admitted Jews to England. * A