=== CHUNK 28: Words 54001-56000 ===
Wilkins wished he hadn't. The Dutch and the English were at war. Because of the Plague, this had been a desultory struggle thus far, and Daniel had forgotten about it. It was midwinter. Cold had brought the Plague to a stand. Months would pass before the weather permitted resumption of the sea-campaign. But the time to lay plans for such campaigns was now. It ought to surprise no one if the Admiralty met with the Lord High Admiral now. It would be surprising if they didn't. What struck Daniel was that Wilkins cared that he, Daniel, had seen something. The Restoration, and Daniel's Babylonian exile and subjugation at Cambridge, had led him to think of himself as a perfect nobody, except perhaps when it came to Natural Philosophy – and it was more obvious every day that even within the Royal Society he was nothing compared to Wren and Hooke. So why should John Wilkins give a fig whether Daniel spied a flotilla of admirals and collected, from that, that John Comstock was hosting James, Duke of York, brother of Charles II and next in line to the throne? It must be (as Daniel realized, walking back through a defoliated orchard alongside the brooding Wilkins) because he was the son of Drake. And though Drake was a retired agitator of a defeated and downcast sect, at bay in his house on Holborn, someone was still afraid of him. Or if not of him, then of his sect. But the sect was shattered into a thousand claques and cabals. Cromwell was gone, Drake was too old, Gregory Bolstrood had been executed, and his son Knott was in exile – That was it. They were afraid of Daniel. 'What is funny?' Wilkins demanded. 'People,' Daniel said, 'and what goes on in their minds sometimes.' 'I say, you're not referring to me by that – ? – !' 'Oh, perish the thought. I would not mock my betters.' 'Pray, who on this estate is not your better?' A hard question that. Daniel's answer was silence. Wilkins seemed to find even that alarming. 'I forget you are a Phanatique born and bred.' Which was the same as saying, You recognize no man as your better, do you? 'On the contrary, I see now that you have never forgotten it.' But something seemed to have changed in Wilkins's mind. Like an Admiral working his ship to windward, he had suddenly come about and, after a few moments' luffing and disarray, was now on an altogether novel tack: 'The lady used to be called Anne Hyde – a close relation of John Comstock. So, far from common. Yet too common for a Duke to marry. And yet still too noble to send off to a Continental nunnery, and too fat to move far, in any case. She bore him a couple of daughters: Mary, then Anne. The Duke finally married her, though not without many complications. Since Mary or Anne could conceivably inherit the throne one day, it became a State matter. Various courtiers were talked, bribed, or threatened into coming forward and swearing on stacks of Bibles that they'd fucked Anne Hyde up and down, fucked her in the British Isles and in France, in the Low Countries and the Highlands, in the city and in the country, in ships and palaces, beds and hammocks, bushes, flower-beds, water-closets, and garrets, that they had fucked her drunk and fucked her sober, from behind and in front, from above, below, and both the right and left sides, singly and in groups, in the day and in the night and during all phases of the moon and signs of the Zodiac, whilst also intimating that any number of blacksmiths, Vagabonds, French gigolos, Jesuit provocateurs, comedians, barbers, and apprentice saddlers had been doing the same whensoever they weren't. But despite all of this the Duke of York married her, and socked her away in St. James's Palace, where she's grown like one of our entomologickal prodigies in the cellar.' Daniel had heard a good bit of this before, of course, from men who came to the house on Holborn to pay court to Drake – which gave him the odd sense that Wilkins was paying court to him. Which could not be, for Daniel had no real power or significance at all, and no prospects of getting any. It seemed more plausible that Wilkins felt sorry for Daniel, than afraid of him; and as such was trying to shield him from those dangers that were avoidable while tutoring him in how to cope with the rest. Which meant, if true, that Daniel ought at least to attend to the lesson that Wilkins was trying to give him. The two Princesses, Mary and Anne, would, respectively, be three and one years old now. And as their mother was related to John Comstock, it was entirely plausible that they might be visitors in the house. Which explained Comstock's remark to Wilkins: 'Two of them are all three. ' Female, of tender years, and royal. The burdensome restrictions imposed on their Natural-Philosophic researches by the host made it necessary to convene a very long Symposium in the Kitchen, where Hooke and Wilkins dictated a list (written by Daniel in a loosening hand) of experiments that were neither noisy nor smelly, but (as the evening wore on) increasingly fanciful. Hooke put Daniel to work mending his Condensing Engine, which was a piston-and-cylinder arrangement for compressing or rarefying air. He was convinced that air contained some kind of spirit that sustained both fire and life, which, when it was used up, caused both to be extinguished. So there was a whole range of experiments along the lines of: sealing up a candle and a mouse in a glass vessel, and watching to see what happened (mouse died before candle). They fixed up a huge bladder so that it was leak-proof, and put it to their mouths, and took turns breathing the same air over and over again, to see what would happen. Hooke used his engine to produce a vacuum in a large glass jar, then set a pendulum swinging in the vacuum, and set Charles there to count its swings. On the first really clear night at the onset of winter, Hooke had gone outside with a telescope and peered at Mars: he had found some light and dark patches on its surface, and ever since had been tracking their movements so that he could figure out how long it took that planet to rotate on its axis. He put Charles and Daniel to work grinding better and better lenses, or else bought them from Spinoza in Amsterdam, and they took turns looking at smaller and smaller structures on the moon. But here again, Hooke saw things Daniel didn't. 'The moon must have gravity, like the earth,' he said. 'What makes you say so?' 'The mountains and valleys have a settled shape to them – no matter how rugged the landforms, there is nothing to be seen, on that whole orb, that would fall over under gravitation. With better lenses I could measure the Angle of Repose and calculate the force of her gravity.' 'If the moon gravitates, so must everything else in the heavens,' Daniel observed.* A long skinny package arrived from Amsterdam. Daniel opened it up, expecting to find another telescope – instead it was a straight, skinny horn, about five feet long, with helical ridges and grooves. 'What is it?' he asked Wilkins. Wilkins peered at it over his glasses and said (sounding mildly annoyed), 'The horn of a unicorn.' 'But I thought that the unicorn was a mythical beast.' ' I'venever seen one.' 'Then where do you suppose this came from?' 'How the devil should I know?' Wilkins returned. 'All I know is, you can buy them in Amsterdam.' Kings most commonly, though strong in legions, are but weak in Arguments; as they who have ever accustom'd from the Cradle to use thir will onely as thir right hand, thir reason alwayes as thir left. Whence unexpectedly constrain'd to that kind of combat, they prove but weak and puny Adversaries. – MILTON, PREFACE TO Eikonoklastes DANIEL GOT USED TO SEEING the Duke of York out riding and hunting with his princely friends – as much as the son of Drake could get used to such a sight. Once the hunters rode past within a bowshot of him, near enough that he could hear the Duke talking to his companion – in French.Which gave Daniel an impulse to rush up to this French Catholic man in his French clothes, who claimed to be England's next king, and put an end to him. He mastered it by recalling to mind the way that the Duke's father's head had plopped into the basket on the scaffold at the Banqueting House. Then he thought to himself: What an odd family! Too, he could no longer muster quite the same malice towards these people. Drake had raised his sons to hate the nobility by wasting no opportunity to point out their privileges, and the way they profited from those privileges without really being aware of them. This sort of discourse had wrought extraordinarily, not only in Drake's sons but in every Dissident meeting-house in the land, and led to Cromwell and much else; but Cromwell had made Puritans powerful, and as Daniel was now seeing, that power – as if it were a living thing with a mind of its own – was trying to pass itself on to him, which would mean that Daniel was a child of privilege too. The tables of the Philosophical Language were finished: a vast fine-meshed net drawn through the Cosmos so that everything known, in Heaven and Earth, was trapped in one of its myriad cells. All that was needed to identify a particular thing was to give its location in the tables, which could be expressed as a series of numbers. Wilkins came up with a system for assigning names to things, so that by breaking a name up into its component syllables, one could know its location in the Tables, and hence what thing it referred to. Wilkins drained all the blood out of a large dog and put it into a smaller dog; minutes later the smaller dog was out chasing sticks. Hooke built a new kind of clock, using the Microscope to examine some of its tiny parts. In so doing he discovered a new kind of mite living in the rags in which these parts had been wrapped. He drew pictures of them, and then performed an exhaustive three-day series of experiments to learn what would and wouldn't kill them: the most effective killer being a Florentine poison he'd been brewing out of tobacco leaves. Sir Robert Moray came to visit, and ground up a bit of the unicorn's horn to make a powder, which he sprinkled in a ring, and placed a spider in the center of the ring. But the spider kept escaping. Moray pronounced the horn to be a fraud. Wilkins hustled Daniel out of bed one night in the wee hours and took him on a dangerous nighttime hay-wain ride to the gaol in Epsom town. 'Fortune has smiled on our endeavours,' Wilkins said. 'The man we are going to interview was condemned to hang. But hanging crushes the parts that are of interest to us – certain delicate structures in the neck. Fortunately for us, before the hangman could get to him, he died of a bloody flux.' 'Is this going to be a new addition to the Tables, then?' Daniel asked wearily. 'Don't be foolish – the anatomical structures in question have been known for centuries. This dead man is going to help us with the Real Character.' 'That's the alphabet for writing down the Philosophical Language?' 'You know that perfectly well. Wake up, Daniel!' 'I ask only because it seems to me you've already come