=== CHUNK 70: Words 138001-140000 ===
the corner of the room, pretending to read a book, was Nicolas Fatio de Duilliers. Daniel immediately, for some reason, saw this through the suspicious eyes of a John Churchill. Here sat a Catholic nobleman who was more at home in Versailles than in London; an Englishman of Puritan upbringing and habits, lately fallen into heresy, the smartest man in the world; and a Swiss Protestant famous for having saved William of Orange from a French plot. Just now they'd been interrupted by a Nonconformist traitor. These differences, which elsewhere sparked duels and wars, counted for naught here; their Brotherhood was somehow above such petty squabbles as the Protestant Reformation and the coming war with France. No wonder Churchill found them insidious. Isaac was a fortnight shy of his forty-sixth birthday. Since his hair had gone white, his appearance had changed very little; he never stopped working to eat or drink and so he was as slender as he had always been, and the only symptom of age was a deepening translucency of his skin, which brought into view tangles of azure veins strewn around his eyes. Like many College dwellers he found it a great convenience to hide his clothing – which was always in a parlous state, being not only worn and shabby but stained and burnt with diverse spirits – underneath an academic robe; but his robe was scarlet, which made him stand out vividly at the College, and here in London all the more so. He did not wear it in the street, but he was wearing it now. He had not affected a wig, so his white hair fell loose over his shoulders. Someone had been brushing that hair. Probably not Isaac. Daniel guessed Fatio. For the Earl of Upnor it had been a challenging couple of decades. He'd been banished once or twice for slaying men in duels, which he did as casually as a stevedore picked his nose. He had gambled away the family's great house in London and been chased off to the Continent for a few years during the most operatic excesses of the so-called Popish Plot. He had, accordingly, muted his dress somewhat. To go with his tall black wig and his thin black moustache he was wearing an outfit that was, fundamentally, black: the de rigueur three-piece suit of waistcoat, coat, and breeches, all in the same fabric – probably a very fine wool. But the whole outfit was crusted over with embroidery done in silver thread, and thin strips of parchment or something had been involved with the needle-work to lift it off the black wool underneath and give it a three-dimensional quality. The effect was as if an extremely fine network of argent vines had grown round his body and now surrounded him and moved with him. He was wearing riding-boots with silver spurs, and was armed with a Spanish rapier whose guard was a tornadic swirl of gracefully curved steel rods with bulbous ends, like a storm of comets spiraling outwards from the grip. Fatio's attire was relatively demure: a many-buttoned sort of cassock, a middling brown wig, a linen shirt, a lace cravat. They were only a little surprised to see him, and no more than normally indignant that he'd burst in without knocking. Upnor showed no sign of wanting to run him through with that rapier. Newton did not seem to think that Daniel's appearing here, now, was any more bizarre than any of the other perceptions that presented themselves to Isaac in a normal day (which was probably true), and Fatio, as always, just observed everything. 'Frightfully sorry to burst in,' Daniel said, 'but I thought you'd like to know that the King's turned up in Sheerness – not above ten miles from Castle Upnor.' The Earl of Upnor now made a visible effort to prevent some strong emotion from assuming control of his face. Daniel couldn't be certain, but he thought it was a sort of incredulous sneer. While Upnor was thus busy, Daniel pressed his advantage: 'The Gentleman of the Bedchamber is in the Presence as we speak, and I suppose that other elements of Court will travel down-river tomorrow, but for now he has nothing – food, drink, a bed are being improvised. As I rode past Castle Upnor yesterday evening, it occurred to me that you might have the means, there, to supply some of His Majesty's wants – ' 'Oh yes,' Upnor said, 'I have all.' 'Shall I make arrangements for a messenger to be sent out then?' 'I can do it myself,' said the Earl. 'Of course I am aware, my lord, that you have the power to dispatch messages. But out of a desire to make myself useful I – ' 'No. I mean, I can deliver the orders myself, for I am on my way to Upnor at daybreak.' 'I beg your pardon, my lord.' 'Is there anything else, Mr. Waterhouse?' 'Not unless I may be of assistance in this house.' Upnor looked at Newton. Newton – who'd been gazing at Daniel – seemed to detect this in the corner of his eye, and spoke: 'In this house, Daniel, a vast repository of alchemical lore has accumulated. Nearly all of it is garbled nonsense. Some of it is true wisdom – secrets that ought rightly to be kept secret from them in whose hands they would be dangerous. Our task is to sort out one from the other, and burn what is useless, and see to it that what is good and true is distributed to the libraries and laboratories of the adept. It is difficult for me to see how you could be of any use in this, since you believe that all of it is nonsense, and have a well-established history of incendiary behavior in the presence of such writings.' 'You continue to view my 1677 actions in the worst possible light.' 'Not so, Daniel. I am aware that you thought you were showering favors on me. Nonetheless, I say that what happened in 1677 must be looked on as permanently disqualifying you from being allowed to handle alchemical literature around open flames.' 'Very well,' said Daniel. 'Good night, Isaac. M'Lord. Monsieur.' Upnor and Fatio were both looking a bit startled by Isaac's cryptic discourse, so Daniel bowed perfunctorily and backed out of the room. They resumed their previous conversation as if Daniel were naught more than a servant who'd nipped in to serve tea. Upnor said, 'Who can guess what notions have got into his head, living for so many years in that land, over-run with the cabals of crypto-Jews, and Indians sacrificing each other atop Pyramids?' 'You could just write him a letter and ask him,' suggested Fatio, in a voice so bright and reasonable that it annoyed even Daniel, who was rapidly backing out of earshot. He could tell, just from this, that Fatio was no alchemist; or if he was, he was new to it, and not yet inculcated to make everything much more obscure and mysterious than it needed to be. He turned around finally, and nearly bumped into a fellow whom he identified, out of the corner of his eye, as a merry monk who had somehow got grievously lost: it was a robed figure gripping a large stoneware tankard that he had evidently taken out on loan from one of the local drinking establishments. 'Have a care, Mr. Waterhouse, you look too little, for listening so well,' said Enoch Root affably. Daniel started away from him. Locke was still standing there embracing his book; Root was the chap he'd been talking to earlier. Daniel was caught off guard for a few moments; Root took advantage of the lull to down a mouthful of ale. 'You are very rude,' Daniel said. 'What did you say? Root?' ' Rude,to drink alone, when others are present.' 'Each man finds his own sort of rudeness. Some burst into houses, and conversations, uninvited.' 'I was bearing important news.' 'And I am celebrating it.' 'Aren't you afraid that drink will shorten your longevity?' 'Is longevity much on your mind, Mr. Waterhouse?' 'It is on the mind of every man. And I am a man. Who or what are you ?' Locke's eyes had been going back and forth, as at a tennis match. Now they fixed on Enoch for a while. Enoch had got a look as if he were trying to be patient – which was not the same as being patient. 'There's a certain unexamined arrogance to your question, Daniel. Just as Newton presumes that there is some absolute space by which all things – comets even! – are measured and governed, you presume it is all perfectly natural and pre-ordained that the earth should be populated by men, whose superstitions ought to be the ruler by which all things are judged; but why might I not ask of you, ‘Daniel Waterhouse, who or what are you? And why does Creation teem with others like you, and what is your purpose?' “ 'I'll remind you, sirrah, that All Hallows' Eve was more than a month since, and I am not of a humour to be baited with hobgoblin-stories.' 'Nor am I of a humour to be rated a hobgoblin or any other figment of the humane imagination; for 'twas God who imagined me, just as He did you, and thereby brought us into being.' 'Your tankard brims over with scorn for our superstitions and imaginings; yet here you are, as always, in the company of Alchemists.' 'You might have said, ‘Here you are in the center of the Glorious Revolution conversing with a noted political philosopher,'' Root returned, glancing at Locke, who flicked his eyes downward in the merest hint of a bow. 'But I am never credited thus by you, Daniel.' 'I have only seen you in the company of alchemists. Do you deny it?' 'Daniel, I have only seen you in the company of alchemists. But I am aware that you do other things. I know you have oft been at Bedlam with Hooke. Perhaps you have seen priests there who go to converse with madmen. Do you suppose those priests to be mad?' 'I'm not sure if I approve of the similitude – ' Locke began. 'Stay, 'Tis just a figure!' Root laughed rather winningly, reaching out to touch Locke's shoulder. 'A faulty one,' Daniel said, 'for you are an alchemist.' 'I am called an Alchemist. Within living memory, Daniel, everyone who studied what I – and you – study was called by that name. And most persons even today observe no distinction between Alchemy and the younger and more vigorous order of knowledge that is associated with your club.' 'I am too exhausted to harry you through all of your evasions. Out of respect for your friends Mr. Locke, and for Leibniz, I shall give you the benefit of the doubt, and wish you well,' Daniel said. 'God save you, Mr. Waterhouse.' 'And you, Mr. Root. But I say this to you – and you as well, Mr. Locke. As I came in here I saw a map, lately taken from this house, burning in the fire. The map was empty, for it depicted the ocean – most likely, a part of it where no man has ever been. A few lines of latitude were ruled across that vellum void, and some legendary isles drawn in, with great authority, and where the map-maker could not restrain himself he drew phantastickal monsters. That map, to me, is Alchemy. It is good that it burnt, and fitting that it burnt tonight, the eve of a Revolution that I will be so bold as to call my life's work. In a few years Mr. Hooke will learn to make a proper chronometer, finishing what Mr. Huygens began thirty years ago, and then the Royal Society will draw maps with lines of longitude as well as latitude, giving us a