=== CHUNK 84: Words 166001-168000 ===
conical glass, wide at the top and pointed on the bottom, which when filled with cold water or (preferably) snow and left outside overnight, would condense dew on its outside; the dew would run down and drip into a receptacle underneath. * Forerunner of the Royal Society. * He was not the first person to observe it. * I.e., it was already 1665 everywhere except England, where the new year was held to begin on March 25th. * Though the fields were becoming city streets, so at this point it was more like St. Martin-at-the-edge-of-a-field, and soon to be St. Martin-within-visual-rangeof-a-very-expensive-field-or-two. * I.e., he had a sword. * The five men King Charles II had chosen to run England: John Comstock, the Earl of Epsom, Lord Chancellor; Thomas More Anglesey, Duke of Gunfleet, Chancellor of the Exchequer; Knott Bolstrood, whod been coaxed back from Dutch self-exile to serve as His Majestys Secretary of State; Sir Richard Apthorp, a banker, and a founder of the East India Company; and General Hugh Lewis, the Duke of Tweed. * Knott Bolstrood, a Barker and an old friend of Drakes, was rabidly Protestant and anti-Frenchthe King had made him Secretary of State because no one in his right mind could possibly accuse him of being a crypto-Catholic. * Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie, or Dutch East India Company. * None other than Knott Bolstrood, whod been ennobled, for protocol reasons, when the King had named him Secretary of Statethe King had chosen to make him Count Penistone because that way, Bolstrood the ultra-Puritan could not sign his name without writing the word penis. * Pansophism was a movement among Continental savants, in which the said Comenius had been an important figure; it had influenced Wilkins, Oldenburg, and others to found the Experimental Philosophical Club and later the Royal Society. * Philippe, duc dOrléans, was the younger brother of King Louis XIV of France. * Thomas Ham had been made Viscount Walbrook by the King. * A vast, turgid, incoherent compendium of alchemical lore. * Here, a moiety of the audiencemostly Cambridge undergraduatesstood up (if they werent standing to begin with) and applauded. Admittedly they wouldve come erect and shown their appreciation for almost any human female recognizable as such who appeared on the grounds of their College, but more so in this case since the role of Lydia was being played by Eleanor (Nell) Gwynthe Kings Mistress. * A grassy quadrangle surrounded by buildings of Trinity College. * Pepys being a good examplebut he wasnt there. * As King Louis XIV had guards dressed as Croats, so Charles might have Poles; any nation whose survival depended on crossing swords with Turks had a fearsome reputation nowadays. * Which, remember, is one storey below the quarterdeck, where Daniel is pretty much giving up on getting any relaxation. * That is, ahead of them and off to the side from which the wind is blowingat about ten oclock. * At about five oclock if he were facing toward the bow. * Mary Beatrice dEste of Modena; for Anne Hyde had been winched into a double-wide grave two years previously. * There are thirty-two points on the compass rose. * Jack could not read but could infer as much from the types of letters used. * The reason the pikemen didnt protectively surround the musketeers, instead of being surrounded by them, was that even if the musketeers aimed between them, or over their heads, they would get mowed down by errant balls; because if, as frequently happened, a musket ball was a bit too small for its barrel, it would take to bouncing from one side of the barrel to the other as it was propelled out, and might emerge at a sharp, startling sideways angle. * It turned out that if you did the mathematicks on a typical war, the cost of powder was more important than just about anything elseHerr Geidel insisted that the gunpowder in the arsenal of Venice, for example, was worth more than the annual revenue of the entire city. This explained a lot of oddness Jack had witnessed in various campaigns and forced him to reconsider (briefly) his opinion that all officers were mad. * Which Jack could tell by interpreting the coats of arms carved on the gateposts and embroidered on the flags. * As the trading-houses were called, because important men called factors inhabited and ran them. * E.g., Hey, Doc, how many goats were shaved to make that wig? * Just guessing, here. * Which they knew because it bore the trademark of none other than Herr Geidel. *Faulbaum , the Germans said, meaning lazy and rotten tree. They were alders. * The Doctor: Actually, it is a helix, not a spiral. * Various pieces of evidence suggested to Jack that hed been sleeping. * It being one of the many peculiar features of Jacks upbringing that (1) he had a perpetual sparring partner (Bob)perpetual in the sense that they slept in the same bed at night and, as brothers do, fought all dayagainst whom he was evenly matched, and (2) at the age when every boy engages in mock sword-fight, he and Bob happened to suddenly find themselves living in a military barracks, where their duels served as free entertainment for large numbers of men who actually did know a few things about fighting with swords, and who found the entertainment lacking if it was not well played, both in a technical sense (blows had to be delivered and parried in some way that was realistic to their discerning eyes) and in a dramatic sense (extra points scored, and extra food thrown in their direction, for enhancements such as hanging by the knees from joists and fighting upside-down, swinging like apes from ropes, etc.). The result being that from a young age the Shaftoe boys had sword-fighting abilities considerably above their station in life (most people like them never came into contact with a sword at all, unless it was with the edge of the blade in the last instant of their life), but limited to the type of sword called the spadroona cut-andthrust weaponwhich, theyd been warned, might not be very effective against Gentlemen armed with long slender poky rapiers and trained to insert them deftly through narrow gaps in ones defenses. The Janissary-blade was a rough Mahometan equivalent of a spadroon, therefore, ideally matched to Jacks style, or Bobs for that matter. He waved it around dramatically. * And of her husband, Duke Ernst August. * Louis XIV of France. * William of Orange. * William of Orange. * King Louis XIV of Francenot really Monmouths uncle, but the brother of the widower of the sister of his illegitimate father, as well as the son of the brother of his grandmother, and many other connexions besides. * A quartering of elements old (fleurs-de-lis, denoting their ancient connections to the royal family) and new (Negro-heads in iron neck-collars). * It dropped from 572 to 250 when word of Monmouths rebellion spread. * E.g., Nassau, Katsenellenbogen, Dietz, Vianden, Meurs. * The flying jib downhaul. * The Duke of Northumbria was the bastard son of Charles II by his mistress Barbara Palmer, nee Villiers, Duchess of Castlemaine. * The Duke of Richmond was the bastard son of Charles II by his mistress Louise de Kéroualle, Duchess of Portsmouth. * The Duke of St. Albans was the bastard son of Charles II by his mistress Nell Gwyn, the nubile comedienne and apple-woman. * The name of Hexagram 3 of the I Ching, or 010001, that being the encryption key for the subliminal message embedded in the script of this letter. * Darkening of the Light: Hexagram 36 of the I Ching, or 000101. * Increase: Hexagram 42 of the I Ching, or 110001. * Family: Hexagram 37 of the I Ching, or 110101. * Break-through: Hexagram 43 of the I Ching, or 011111. Quicksilver (Baroque Cycle, #1) 1670 Sir ROBERT MORAY produced a discourse concerning coffee, written by Dr. GODDARD at the King's command; which was read, and the author desired to leave a copy of it with the society. Mr. BOYLE mentioned, that he had been informed, that the much drinking of coffee produced the palsy. The bishop of Exeter seconded him, and said, that himself had found it dispose to paralytical effects; which however he thought were caused only in hot constitutions, by binding. Mr. GRAUNT affirmed, that he knew two gentlemen, great drinkers of coffee, very paralytical. Dr. WHISTLER suggested, that it might be inquired, whether the same persons took much tobacco. – THE HISTORY OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON FOR IMPROVING OF NATURAL KNOWLEDGE , JAN . 18, 1664/5* HAVING NO DESIRE to be either palsied, or paralytical, Daniel avoided the stuff until 1670, when he got his first taste of it at Mrs. Green's Coffee-House, cunningly sited in the place where the western end of the Strand yawned into Charing Cross. The Church of St. Martin-in-the-Fields lay to the west.*To the east was the New Exchange – this was the nucleus of a whole block of shops. North was Covent Garden, and South, according to rumor and tradition, was the River Thames, a few hundred yards distant – but you couldn't see it because noble Houses and Palaces formed a solid levee running from the King's residence (Whitehall Palace) all the way round the river-bend to Fleet Ditch, where the wharves began. Daniel Waterhouse walked past Mrs. Green's one summer morning in 1670, a minute after Isaac Newton had done so. It had a little garden in the front, with several tables. Daniel went into it and stood for a moment, checking out his lines of sight. Isaac had risen early, sneaked out of his bedchamber, and taken to the streets without eating any breakfast – not unusual for Isaac. Daniel had followed him out the front door of the (rebuilt, and dramatically enlarged) Waterhouse residence; across Lincoln's Inn Fields, where a few fashionable early risers were walking dogs, or huddling in mysterious conferences; and (coincidentally) right past the very place at Drury Lane and Long Acre where those two Frenchmen had died of the Black Death six years earlier, inaugurating the memorable Plague Years. Thence into the dangerous chasm of flying earth and loose paving-stones that was St. Martin's Lane – for John Comstock, Earl of Epsom, acting in his capacity as Commissioner of Sewers, had decreed that this meandering country cow-path must be paved, and made over into a city street – the axis of a whole new London. Daniel had been keeping his distance so that Isaac wouldn't notice him if he turned around – though you never knew with Isaac, who had better senses than most wild animals. St. Martin's Lane was crowded with heavy stone-carts drawn by teams of mighty horses, just barely under the control of their teamsters, and Daniel was forced to dodge wagons, and to scurry around and over piles of dirt and cobbles, in order to keep sight of Isaac. Once they had reached the open spaces of Charing Cross, and the adjoining Yard where Kings of Scotland had once come to humble themselves before their liege-lord in Whitehall, Daniel could afford to maintain more distance – Isaac's silver hair was easy to pick out in a crowd. And if Isaac's destination was one of the shops, coffee-houses, livery stables, gardens, markets, or noblemen's houses lining the great Intersection, why, Daniel could sit down right about here and spy on him at leisure. Whyhe was doing so, Daniel had no idea. It was just that by getting up and leaving so mysteriously, Isaac begged to be followed. Not that he was doing a good job of being sneaky. Isaac was accustomed to being so much brighter than everyone else that he really had no idea of what others were or weren't capable of. So when he got it into his head to be tricky, he came