=== CHUNK 30: Words 58001-60000 ===
wonder at the noise. Is it expected to continue all night?' 'On the contrary, it has already ceased,' Daniel pointed out. The Lord High Admiral preceded him into the kitchen, where Hooke and Wilkins had thrust a brass pipe down the dog's windpipe and connected it to the same trusty pair of bellows they'd used to make the dead man's head speak. 'By pumping the bellows they were able to inflate and deflate the lungs, and prevent the dog from asphyxiating,' explained Charles Comstock, after the experimenters had bowed to the Duke. 'Now it only remains to be seen how long the animal can be kept alive in this way. Mr. Waterhouse and I shall spell each other at the bellows until Mr. Hooke pronounces an end to the experiment.' At the mention of Daniel's family name, the Duke flicked his eyes towards him for a moment. 'If it must suffer in the name of your inquiry, thank Heaven it does so quietly,' the Duke remarked, and turned to leave. The others would follow; but the Duke stopped them with a 'Do carry on, as you were.' But to Daniel he said, 'A word, if you please, Mr. Waterhouse,' and so Daniel escorted him out onto the lawn half wondering whether he was about to be carved up worse than the dog. A few moments previously, he'd mastered a daft impulse to tackle his royal highness before his royal highness reached the kitchen, for fear that his royal highness would be disgusted by what was going on in there. But he'd not reckoned on the fact that the Duke, young though he was, had fought in a lot of battles, both at sea and on land. Which was to say that as bad as this business with the dog was, the Duke of York had seen much worse done to humans. The R.S., far from seeming like a band of mad ruthless butchers, were dilettantes by his standards. Further grounds (as if any were wanted!) for Daniel to feel queasy. Daniel really knew of no way to regulate his actions other than to be rational. Princes were taught a thing or two about being rational, as they were taught to play a little lute and dance a passable ricercar. But what drove their actions was their own force of will; in the end they did as they pleased, rational or not. Daniel had liked to tell himself that rational thought led to better actions than brute force of will; yet here was the Duke of York all but rolling his eyes at them and their experiment, seeing naught that was new. 'A friend of mine brought back something nasty from France,' his royal highness announced. It took Daniel a long time to decrypt this. He tried to understand it in any number of different ways, but suddenly the knowledge rumbled through his mind like a peal of thunder through a coppice. The Duke had said: I have syphilis . 'Shame, that,' Daniel said. For he was not sure, yet, that he had translated it correctly. He must be ever so careful and vague lest this conversation degenerate into a comedy of errors ending with his death by rapier-thrust. 'Some are of the opinion that mercury cures it.' 'It is also a poison, though,' Daniel said. Which was common knowledge; but it seemed to confirm, in the mind of James Stuart, Duke of York and Lord High Admiral, that he was talking to just the right chap. 'Surely with so many clever Doctors in the Royal Society, working on artificial breath and such, there must be some thought of how to cure a man such as my friend.' And his wife and his children,Daniel thought, for James must have either gotten it from, or passed it on to, Anne Hyde, who had therefore probably given it to the daughters, Mary and Anne. To date, James's older brother the King had not been able to produce any legitimate children. There were plenty of bastards like Monmouth. But none eligible to inherit the throne. And so this nasty thing that James had brought back from France was really a matter of whether the Stuart dynasty was to survive. This raised a fascinating side question. With a whole cottage full of Royal Society Fellows to choose from, why had James carefully chosen to speak with the one who happened to be the son of a Phanatique? 'It is a sensitive matter,' the Duke remarked, 'the sort of thing that stains a man's honor, if it is bandied about.' Daniel readily translated this as follows: If you tell anyone, I'll send someone round to engage you in a duel.Not that anyone would pay any notice, anyway, if the son of Drake were to level an accusation of moral turpitude against the Duke of York. Drake had been doing such things without letup for fifty years. And so the Duke's strategy was now plain to Daniel: he had chosen Daniel to hear about his syphilis because if Daniel were so foolish as to spread rumors, no one would hear them above the roar of obloquy produced at all times by Drake. In any case, Daniel would not be able to keep it up for very long before he was found in a field outside of London with a lot of rapier wounds in his body. 'You will let me know, won't you, if the Royal Society learns anything on this front?' said James, making to leave. 'So that you can pass the information on to your friend? Of course,' Daniel said. Which was the end of that conversation. He returned to the kitchen to get an idea of how much longer the experiment was going to go on. The answer: longer than any of them really wanted. By the time they were finished, dawn-light was beginning to come in the windows, giving them a premonition of just how ghastly the kitchen was going to look when the sun actually rose. Hooke was sitting crookedly in a chair, shocked and morose, appalled by himself, and Wilkins was hunched forward supporting his head on a smeared fist. They'd come here supposedly as refugees from the Black Death, but really they were fleeing their own ignorance – they hungered for understanding, and were like starving wretches who had broken into a lord's house and gone on an orgy of gluttonous feasting, wolfing down new meals before they could digest, or even chew, the old ones. It had lasted for the better part of a year, but now, as the sun rose over the aftermath of the artificial breath experiment, they were scattered around, blinking stupidly at the devastated kitchen, with its dog-ribs strewn all over the floor, and huge jars of preserved spleens and gall-bladders, specimens of exotic parasites nailed to planks or glued to panes of glass, vile poisons bubbling over on the fire, and suddenly they felt completely disgusted with themselves. Daniel gathered the dog's remains up in his arms – messy, but it scarcely mattered – all their clothes would have to be burned anyway – and walked out to the bone-yard on the east side of the cottage, where the remains of all Hooke's and Wilkins's investigations were burned, buried, or used to study the spontaneous generation of flies. Notwithstanding which, the air was relatively clean and fresh out here. Having set the remains down, Daniel found that he was walking directly towards a blazing planet, a few degrees above the western horizon, which could only be Venus. He walked and walked, letting the dew on the grass cleanse the blood from his shoes. The dawn was making the fields shimmer pink and green. Isaac had sent him a letter: 'Require asst. w/obs. of Venus pls. come if you can.' He had wondered at the time if this might be something veiled. But standing there in that dew-silvered field with his back to the house of carnage and nothing before him but the Dawn Star, Daniel remembered what Isaac had said years ago about the natural harmony between the heavenly orbs and the orbs we view them with. Four hours later he was riding north on a borrowed horse. AboardMinerva, Plymouth Bay, Massachusetts NOVEMBER 1713 DANIEL WAKES UP WORRIED. The stiffness in his masseter muscles, the aching in his frontalis and temporalis, tells him he's been worrying about something in his sleep. Still, being worried is preferable to being terrified, which he was until yesterday, when Captain van Hoek finally gave up on the idea of trying to sail Minerva into the throat of a gale and turned back to calmer waters along the Massachusetts coast. Captain van Hoek would probably have called it 'a bit of chop' or some other nautical euphemism, but Daniel had gone to his cabin with a pail to catch his vomit, and an empty bottle to receive the notes he'd been scratching out in the last few days. If the weather had gotten any worse, he'd have tossed these down the head. Perhaps some Moor or Hottentot would have found them in a century or two and read about Dr. Waterhouse's early memories of Newton and Leibniz. The planks of the poop deck are only a few inches above Daniel's face as he lies on his sack of straw. He's learned to recognize the tread of van Hoek's boots on those boards. On a ship it is bad manners to approach within a fathom of the captain, so even when the poop deck is crowded, van Hoek's footsteps are always surrounded by a large empty space. As Minerva 's quest for a steady west wind has stretched out to a week and then two, Daniel has learned to read the state of the captain's mind from the figure and rhythm of his movements – each pattern like the steps of a courtly dance. A steady long stride means that all is well, and van Hoek is merely touring the precincts. When he's watching the weather he walks about in small eddies, and when he's shooting the sun with his back-staff he stands still, grinding the balls of his feet against the planks to keep his balance. But this morning (Daniel supposes it is early in the morning, though the sun hasn't come up yet) van Hoek is doing something Daniel's never observed before: flitting back and forth across the poop deck with brisk angry steps, pausing at one rail or another for a few seconds at a time. The sailors, he senses, are mostly awake, but they are all belowdecks shushing one another and tending to small, intense, quiet jobs. Yesterday they had sailed into Cape Cod Bay – the shallow lake held in the crook of Cape Cod's arm – to ride out the tail end of that northeast gale, and to make certain repairs, and get the ship more winter-ready than it had been. But then the wind shifted round to the north and threatened to drive them against the sand-banks at the southern fringe of said Bay, and so they sailed toward the sunset, and maneuvered the big ship with exquisite care between rocks to starboard and sunken islands to port, and thus entered Plymouth Bay. As night fell they dropped anchor in an inlet, well sheltered from the weather, and (as Daniel supposed) prepared to tarry there for a few days and await more auspicious weather. But van Hoek was obviously nervous – he doubled the watch, and put men to work cleaning and oiling the ship's surprisingly comprehensive arsenal of small firearms. A distant boom rattles the panes in Daniel's cabin window. He rolls out of bed like a fourteen-year-old and scurries to the exit, flailing one hand over his head in the dark so he won't brain himself on the overhead beam. When he emerges onto the quarter-deck he seems to hear answering fire from all the isles and hillside around them –